# The Precession of Simulacra #

The simulacrum is never what hides the truth—it is truth that
hides the fact that there is none.

The simulacrum is true.

:::{.signature}
—Ecclesiastes
:::

:::{.initial}
If once we were able to view the Borges fable
in which the cartographers of the Empire draw up a map so
detailed that it ends up covering the territory exactly (the
decline of the Empire witnesses the fraying of this map, little
by little, and its fall into ruins, though some shreds are still
discernible in the deserts—the metaphysical beauty of this ruined
abstraction testifying to a pride equal to the Empire and rotting
like a carcass, returning to the substance of the soil, a bit as
the double ends by being confused with the real through aging)—as
the most beautiful allegory of simulation, this fable has now
come full circle for us, and possesses nothing but the discrete
charm of second-order simulacra.^[Cf. J. Baudrillard, "L'ordre
des simulacres" (The order of simulacra), in *L'echange symbolique
et la mort* (Symbolic exchange and death) (Paris: Gallimard,
1976).]
:::

Today abstraction is no longer that of the map, the double, the
mirror, or the concept. Simulation is no longer that of a
territory, a referential being, or a substance. It is the
generation by models of a real without origin or reality: a
hyperreal. The territory no longer precedes the map, nor does it
survive it. It is nevertheless the map that precedes the
territory—*precession of simulacra*—that engenders the territory,
and if one must return to the fable, today it is the territory
whose shreds slowly rot across the extent of the map. It is the
real, and not the map, whose vestiges persist here and there in
the deserts that are no longer those of the Empire, but ours.
*The desert of the real itself*.

In fact, even inverted, Borges's fable is unusable. Only the
allegory of the Empire, perhaps, remains. Because it is with this
same imperialism that present-day simulators attempt to make the
real, all of the real, coincide with their models of simulation.
But it is no longer a question of either maps or territories.
Something has disappeared: the sovereign difference, between one
and the other, that constituted the charm of abstraction. Because
it is difference that constitutes the poetry of the map and the
charm of the territory, the magic of the concept and the charm of
the real. This imaginary of representation, which simultaneously
culminates in and is engulfed by the cartographers mad project of
the ideal coextensivity of map and territory, disappears in the
simulation whose operation is nuclear and genetic, no longer at
all specular or discursive. It is all of metaphysics that is
lost. No more mirror of being and appearances, of the real and
its concept. No more imaginary coextensivity: it is genetic
miniaturization that is the dimension of simulation. The real is
produced from miniaturized cells, matrices, and memory banks,
models of control—and it can be reproduced an indefinite number
of times from these. It no longer needs to be rational, because
it no longer measures itself against either an ideal or negative
instance. It is no longer anything but operational. In fact, it
is no longer really the real, because no imaginary envelops it
anymore. It is a hyperreal, produced from a radiating synthesis
of combinatory models in a hyperspace without atmosphere.

By crossing into a space whose curvature is no longer that of the
real, nor that of truth, the era of simulation is inaugurated by
a liquidation of all referentials—worse: with their artificial
resurrection in the systems of signs, a material more malleable
than meaning, in that it lends itself to all systems of
equivalences, to all binary oppositions, to all combinatory
algebra. It is no longer a question of imitation, nor
duplication, nor even parody. It is a question of substituting
the signs of the real for the real, that is to say of an
operation of deterring every real process via its operational
double, a programmatic, metastable, perfectly descriptive machine
that offers all the signs of the real and short-circuits all its
vicissitudes. Never again will the real have the chance to
produce itself such is the vital function of the model in a
system of death, or rather of anticipated resurrection, that no
longer even gives the event of death a chance. A hyperreal
henceforth sheltered from the imaginary, and from any distinction
between the real and the imaginary, leaving room only for the
orbital recurrence of models and for the simulated generation of
differences.

## The Divine Irreference of Images ##

:::{.noindent}
To dissimulate is to pretend not to have
what one has. To simulate is to feign to have what one doesn't
have. One implies a presence, the other an absence. But it is
more complicated than that because simulating is not pretending:
"Whoever fakes an illness can simply stay in bed and make
everyone believe he is ill. Whoever simulates an illness produces
in himself some of the symptoms" (Littré). Therefore, pretending,
or dissimulating, leaves the principle of reality intact: the
difference is always clear, it is simply masked, whereas
simulation threatens the difference between the "true" and the
"false," the "real" and the "imaginary." Is the simulator sick or
not, given that he produces "true" symptoms? Objectively one
cannot treat him as being either ill or not ill. Psychology and
medicine stop at this point, forestalled by the illness's
henceforth undiscoverable truth. For if any symptom can be
"produced," and can no longer be taken as a fact of nature, then
every illness can be considered as simulatable and simulated, and
medicine loses its meaning since it only knows how to treat
"real" illnesses according to their objective causes.
Psychosomatics evolves in a dubious manner at the borders of the
principle of illness. As to psychoanalysis, it transfers the
symptom of the organic order to the unconscious order: the latter
is new and taken for "real" more real than the other—but why
would simulation be at the gates of the unconscious? Why couldn't
the "work" of the unconscious be "produced" in the same way as
any old symptom of classical medicine? Dreams already are.
:::

Certainly, the psychiatrist purports that "for every form of
mental alienation there is a particular order in the succession
of symptoms of which the simulator is ignorant and in the absence
of which the psychiatrist would not be deceived." This (which
dates from 1865) in order to safeguard the principle of a truth
at all costs and to escape the interrogation posed by
simulation—the knowledge that truth, reference, objective cause
have ceased to exist. Now, what can medicine do with what floats
on either side of illness, on either side of health, with the
duplication of illness in a discourse that is no longer either
true or false? What can psychoanalysis do with the duplication of
the discourse of the unconscious in the discourse of simulation
that can never again be unmasked, since it is not false
either?^[A discourse that is itself not susceptible to being
resolved in transference. It is the entanglement of these two
discourses that renders psychoanalysis interminable.]

What can the army do about simulators? Traditionally it unmasks
them and punishes them, according to a clear principle of
identification. Today it can discharge a very good simulator as
exactly equivalent to a "real" homosexual, a heart patient, or a
madman. Even military psychology draws back from Cartesian
certainties and hesitates to make the distinction between true
and false, between the "produced" and the authentic symptom. "If
he is this good at acting crazy, it's because he is." Nor is
military psychology mistaken in this regard: in this sense, all
crazy people simulate, and this lack of distinction is the worst
kind of subversion.

It is against this lack of distinction that classical reason
armed itself in all its categories. But it is what today again
outflanks them, submerging the principle of truth.

Beyond medicine and the army favored terrains of simulation, the
question returns to religion and the simulacrum of divinity: "I
forbade that there be any simulacra in the temples because the
divinity that animates nature can never be represented." Indeed
it can be. But what becomes of the divinity when it reveals
itself in icons, when it is multiplied in simulacra? Does it
remain the supreme power that is simply incarnated in images as a
visible theology? Or does it volatilize itself in the simulacra
that, alone, deploy their power and pomp of fascination—the
visible machinery of icons substituted for the pure and
intelligible Idea of God? This is precisely what was feared by
Iconoclasts, whose millennial quarrel is still with us
today.^[Cf. M. Perniola, *Icônes, visions, simulacres* (Icons,
visions, simulacra), 39.] This is precisely because they
predicted this omnipotence of simulacra, the faculty simulacra
have of effacing God from the conscience of man, and the
destructive, annihilating truth that they allow to appear—that
deep down God never existed, that only the simulacrum ever
existed, even that God himself was never anything but his own
simulacrum—from this came their urge to destroy the images. If
they could have believed that these images only obfuscated or
masked the Platonic Idea of God, there would have been no reason
to destroy them. One can live with the idea of distorted truth.
But their metaphysical despair came from the idea that the image
didn't conceal anything at all, and that these images were in
essence not images, such as an original model would have made
them, but perfect simulacra, forever radiant with their own
fascination. Thus this death of the divine referential must be
exorcised at all costs.

One can see that the iconoclasts, whom one accuses of disdaining
and negating images, were those who accorded them their true
value, in contrast to the iconolaters who only saw reflections in
them and were content to venerate a filigree God. On the other
hand, one can say that the icon worshipers were the most modern
minds, the most adventurous, because, in the guise of having God
become apparent in the mirror of images, they were already
enacting his death and his disappearance in the epiphany of his
representations (which, perhaps, they already knew no longer
represented anything, that they were purely a game, but that it
was therein the great game lay—knowing also that it is dangerous
to unmask images, since they dissimulate the fact that there is
nothing behind them).

This was the approach of the Jesuits, who founded their politics
on the virtual disappearance of God and on the worldly and
spectacular manipulation of consciences the evanescence of God in
the epiphany of power—the end of transcendence, which now only
serves as an alibi for a strategy altogether free of influences
and signs. Behind the baroqueness of images hides the éminence
grise of politics.

This way the stake will always have been the murderous power of
images, murderers of the real, murderers of their own model, as
the Byzantine icons could be those of divine identity. To this
murderous power is opposed that of representations as a
dialectical power, the visible and intelligible mediation of the
Real. All Western faith and good faith became engaged in this
wager on representation: that a sign could refer to the depth of
meaning, that a sign could be exchanged for meaning and that
something could guarantee this exchange—God of course. But what
if God himself can be simulated, that is to say can be reduced to
the signs that constitute faith? Then the whole system becomes
weightless, it is no longer itself anything but a gigantic
simulacrum—not unreal, but a simulacrum, that is to say never
exchanged for the real, but exchanged for itself, in an
uninterrupted circuit without reference or circumference.

Such is simulation, insofar as it is opposed to representation.
Representation stems from the principle of the equivalence of the
sign and of the real (even if this equivalence is Utopian, it is
a fundamental axiom). Simulation, on the contrary, stems from the
Utopia of the principle of equivalence, *from the radical
negation of the sign as value*, from the sign as the reversion
and death sentence of every reference. Whereas representation
attempts to absorb simulation by interpreting it as a false
representation, simulation envelops the whole edifice of
representation itself as a simulacrum.

Such would be the successive phases of the image:

* it is the reflection of a profound reality;  
* it masks and denatures a profound reality;  
* it masks the absence of a profound reality;  
* it has no relation to any reality whatsoever: it is its own
pure simulacrum.

In the first case, the image is a *good*
appearance—representation is of the sacramental order. In the
second, it is an evil appearance—it is of the order of
maleficence. In the third, it plays at being an appearance—it is
of the order of sorcery. In the fourth, it is no longer of the
order of appearances, but of simulation.

The transition from signs that dissimulate something to signs
that dissimulate that there is nothing marks a decisive turning
point. The first reflects a theology of truth and secrecy (to
which the notion of ideology still belongs). The second
inaugurates the era of simulacra and of simulation, in which
there is no longer a God to recognize his own, no longer a Last
Judgment to separate the false from the true, the real from its
artificial resurrection, as everything is already dead and
resurrected in advance.

When the real is no longer what it was, nostalgia assumes its
full meaning. There is a plethora of myths of origin and of signs
of reality—a plethora of truth, of secondary objectivity, and
authenticity. Escalation of the true, of lived experience,
resurrection of the figurative where the object and substance
have disappeared. Panic-stricken production of the real and of
the referential, parallel to and greater than the panic of
material production: this is how simulation appears in the phase
that concerns us—a strategy of the real, of the neoreal and the
hyperreal that everywhere is the double of a strategy of
deterrence.

## Ramses, or the Rosy-Colored Resurrection ##

:::{.noindent}
Ethnology brushed up against its paradoxical
death in 1971, the day when the Philippine government decided to
return the few dozen Tasaday who had just been discovered in the
depths of the jungle, where they had lived for eight centuries
without any contact with the rest of the species, to their
primitive state, out of the reach of colonizers, tourists, and
ethnologists. This at the suggestion of the anthropologists
themselves, who were seeing the indigenous people disintegrate
immediately upon contact, like mummies in the open air.
:::

In order for ethnology to live, its object must die; by dying,
the object takes its revenge for being "discovered" and with its
death defies the science that wants to grasp it.

Doesn't all science live on this paradoxical slope to which it is
doomed by the evanescence of its object in its very apprehension,
and by the pitiless reversal that the dead object exerts on it?
Like Orpheus, it always turns around too soon, and, like
Eurydice, its object falls back into Hades.

It is against this hell of the paradox that the ethnologists
wished to protect themselves by cordoning off the Tasaday with
virgin forest. No one can touch them anymore: as in a mine the
vein is closed down. Science loses precious capital there, but
the object will be safe, lost to science, but intact in its
"virginity." It is not a question of sacrifice (science never
sacrifices itself, it is always murderous), but of the simulated
sacrifice of its object in order to save its reality principle.
The Tasaday, frozen in their natural element, will provide a
perfect alibi, an eternal guarantee. Here begins an antiethnology
that will never end and to which Jaulin, Castaneda, Clastres are
various witnesses. In any case, the logical evolution of a
science is to distance itself increasingly from its object, until
it dispenses with it entirely: its autonomy is only rendered even
more fantastic—it attains its pure form.

The Indian thus returned to the ghetto, in the glass coffin of
the virgin forest, again becomes the model of simulation of all
the possible Indians *from before ethnology*. This model thus
grants itself the luxury to incarnate itself beyond itself in the
"brute" reality of these Indians it has entirely
reinvented—Savages who are indebted to ethnology for still being
Savages: what a turn of events, what a triumph for this science
that seemed dedicated to their destruction!

Of course, these savages are posthumous: frozen, cryogenized,
sterilized, protected to death, they have become referential
simulacra, and science itself has become pure simulation. The
same holds true at Cruesot, at the level of the "open" museum
where one museumified in situ, as "historical" witnesses of their
period, entire working-class neighborhoods, living metallurgic
zones, an entire culture, men, women, and children
included—gestures, languages, customs fossilized alive as in a
snapshot. The museum, instead of being circumscribed as a
geometric site, is everywhere now, like a dimension of life. Thus
ethnology, rather than circumscribing itself as an objective
science, will today, liberated from its object, be applied to all
living things and make itself invisible, like an omnipresent
fourth dimension, that of the simulacrum. *We are all Tasadays*,
Indians who have again become what they were—simulacral Indians
who at last proclaim the universal truth of ethnology.

We have all become living specimens in the spectral light of
ethnology, or of antiethnology, which is nothing but the pure
form of triumphal ethnology, under the sign of dead differences,
and of the resurrection of differences. It is thus very naive to
look for ethnology in the Savages or in some Third World—it is
here, everywhere, in the metropolises, in the White community, in
a world completely cataloged and analyzed, then *artificially
resurrected under the auspices of the real*, in a world of
simulation, of the hallucination of truth, of the blackmail of
the real, of the murder of every symbolic form and of its
hysterical, historical retrospection—a murder of which the
Savages, noblesse oblige, were the first victims, but that for a
long time has extended to all Western societies.

But in the same breath ethnology grants us its only and final
lesson, the secret that kills it (and which the Savages knew
better than it did): the vengeance of the dead.

The confinement of the scientific object is equal to the
confinement of the mad and the dead. And just as all of society
is irremediably contaminated by this mirror of madness that it
has held up to itself, science can't help but die contaminated by
the death of this object that is its inverse mirror. It is
science that masters the objects, but it is the objects that
invest it with depth, according to an unconscious reversion,
which only gives a dead and circular response to a dead and
circular interrogation.

Nothing changes when society breaks the mirror of madness
(abolishes the asylums, gives speech back to the insane, etc.)
nor when science seems to break the mirror of its objectivity
(effacing itself before its object, as in Castaneda, etc.) and to
bend down before the "differences." The form produced by
confinement is followed by an innumerable, diffracted,
slowed-down mechanism. As ethnology collapses in its classical
institution, it survives in an antiethnology whose task it is to
reinject the difference fiction, the Savage fiction everywhere,
to conceal that it is this world, ours, which has again become
savage in its way, that is to say, which is devastated by
difference and by death.

In the same way, with the pretext of saving the original, one
forbade visitors to enter the Lascaux caves, but an exact replica
was constructed five hundred meters from it, so that everyone
could see them (one glances through a peephole at the authentic
cave, and then one visits the reconstituted whole). It is
possible that the memory of the original grottoes is itself
stamped in the minds of future generations, but from now on there
is no longer any difference: the duplication suffices to render
both artificial.

In the same way science and technology were recently mobilized to
save the mummy of Ramses II, after it was left to rot for several
dozen years in the depths of a museum. The West is seized with
panic at the thought of not being able to save what the symbolic
order had been able to conserve for forty centuries, but out of
sight and far from the light of day. Ramses does not signify
anything for us, only the mummy is of an inestimable worth
because it is what guarantees that accumulation has meaning. Our
entire linear and accumulative culture collapses if we cannot
stockpile the past in plain view. To this end the pharaohs must
be brought out of their tomb and the mummies out of their
silence. To this end they must be exhumed and given military
honors. They are prey to both science and worms. Only absolute
secrecy assured them this millennial power—the mastery over
putrefaction that signified the mastery of the complete cycle of
exchanges with death. We only know how to place our science in
service of *repairing* the mummy, that is to say restoring a
*visible* order, whereas embalming was a mythical effort that
strove to immortalize a *hidden* dimension.

We require a visible past, a visible continuum, a visible myth of
origin, which reassures us about our end. Because finally we have
never believed in them. Whence this historic scene of the
reception of the mummy at the Orly airport. Why? Because Ramses
was a great despotic and military figure? Certainly. But mostly
because our culture dreams, behind this defunct power that it
tries to annex, of an order that would have had nothing to do
with it, and it dreams of it because it exterminated it by
exhuming it *as its own past*.

We are fascinated by Ramses as Renaissance Christians were by the
American Indians, those (human?) beings who had never known the
word of Christ. Thus, at the beginning of colonization, there was
a moment of stupor and bewilderment before the very possibility
of escaping the universal law of the Gospel. There were two
possible responses: either admit that this Law was not universal,
or exterminate the Indians to efface the evidence. In general,
one contented oneself with converting them, or even simply
discovering them, which would suffice to slowly exterminate them.

Thus it would have been enough to exhume Ramses to ensure his
extermination by museumification. Because mummies don't rot from
worms: they die from being transplanted from a slow order of the
symbolic, master over putrefaction and death, to an order of
history, science, and museums, our order, which no longer masters
anything, which only knows how to condemn what preceded it to
decay and death and subsequently to try to revive it with
science. Irreparable violence toward all secrets, the violence of
a civilization without secrets, hatred of a whole civilization
for its own foundation.

And just as with ethnology, which plays at extricating itself
from its object to better secure itself in its pure form,
*demuseumification* is nothing but another spiral in
artificiality. Witness the cloister of Saint-Michel de Cuxa,
which one will repatriate at great cost from the Cloisters in New
York to reinstall it in "its original site." And everyone is
supposed to applaud this restitution (as they did "the
experimental campaign to take back the sidewalks" on the Champs
Elysees!). Well, if the exportation of the cornices was in effect
an arbitrary act, if the Cloisters in New York are an artificial
mosaic of all cultures (following a logic of the capitalist
centralization of value), their reimportation to the original
site is even more artificial: it is a total simulacrum that links
up with "reality" through a complete circumvolution.

The cloister should have stayed in New York in its simulated
environment, which at least fooled no one. Repatriating it is
nothing but a supplementary subterfuge, acting as if nothing had
happened and indulging in retrospective hallucination.

In the same way, Americans flatter themselves for having brought
the population of Indians back to pre-Conquest levels. One
effaces everything and starts over. They even flatter themselves
for doing better, for exceeding the original number. This is
presented as proof of the superiority of civilization: it will
produce more Indians than they themselves were able to do. (With
sinister derision, this overproduction is again a means of
destroying them: for Indian culture, like all tribal culture,
rests on the limitation of the group and the refusal of any
"unlimited" increase, as can be seen in Ishi's case. In this way,
their demographic "promotion" is just another step toward
symbolic extermination.)

Everywhere we live in a universe strangely similar to the
original—things are doubled by their own scenario. But this
doubling does not signify, as it did traditionally, the imminence
of their death—they are already purged of their death, and better
than when they were alive; more cheerful, more authentic, in the
light of their model, like the faces in funeral homes.

## The Hyperreal and the Imaginary ##

:::{.noindent}
Disneyland is a perfect model of all the
entangled orders of simulacra. It is first of all a play of
illusions and phantasms: the Pirates, the Frontier, the Future
World, etc. This imaginary world is supposed to ensure the
success of the operation. But what attracts the crowds the most
is without a doubt the social microcosm, the *religious*,
miniaturized pleasure of real America, of its constraints and
joys. One parks outside and stands in line inside, one is
altogether abandoned at the exit. The only phantasmagoria in this
imaginary world lies in the tenderness and warmth of the crowd,
and in the sufficient and excessive number of gadgets necessary
to create the multitudinous effect. The contrast with the
absolute solitude of the parking lot—a veritable concentration
camp—is total. Or, rather: inside, a whole panoply of gadgets
magnetizes the crowd in directed flows outside, solitude is
directed at a single gadget: the automobile. By an extraordinary
coincidence (but this derives without a doubt from the
enchantment inherent to this universe), this frozen, childlike
world is found to have been conceived and realized by a man who
is himself now cryogenized: Walt Disney, who awaits his
resurrection through an increase of 180 degrees centigrade.
:::

Thus, everywhere in Disneyland the objective profile of America,
down to the morphology of individuals and of the crowd, is drawn.
All its values are exalted by the miniature and the comic strip.
Embalmed and pacified. Whence the possibility of an ideological
analysis of Disneyland (L. Marin did it very well in *Utopiques,
jeux d'espace* [Utopias, play of space]): digest of the American
way of life, panegyric of American values, idealized
transposition of a contradictory reality. Certainly. But this
masks something else and this "ideological" blanket functions as
a cover for a *simulation of the third order*: Disneyland exists
in order to hide that it is the "real" country, all of "real"
America that is Disneyland (a bit like prisons are there to hide
that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal omnipresence,
that is carceral). Disneyland is presented as imaginary in order
to make us believe that the rest is real, whereas all of Los
Angeles and the America that surrounds it are no longer real, but
belong to the hyperreal order and to the order of simulation. It
is no longer a question of a false representation of reality
(ideology) but of concealing the fact that the real is no longer
real, and thus of saving the reality principle.

The imaginary of Disneyland is neither true nor false, it is a
deterrence machine set up in order to rejuvenate the fiction of
the real in the opposite camp. Whence the debility of this
imaginary, its infantile degeneration. This world wants to be
childish in order to make us believe that the adults are
elsewhere, in the "real" world, and to conceal the fact that true
childishness is everywhere—that it is that of the adults
themselves who come here to act the child in order to foster
illusions as to their real childishness.

Disneyland is not the only one, however. Enchanted Village, Magic
Mountain, Marine World: Los Angeles is surrounded by these
imaginary stations that feed reality, the energy of the real to a
city whose mystery is precisely that of no longer being anything
but a network of incessant, unreal circulation—a city of
incredible proportions but without space, without dimension. As
much as electrical and atomic power stations, as much as cinema
studios, this city, which is no longer anything but an immense
scenario and a perpetual pan shot, needs this old imaginary like
a sympathetic nervous system made up of childhood signals and
faked phantasms.

Disneyland: a space of the regeneration of the imaginary as
waste-treatment plants are elsewhere, and even here. Everywhere
today one must recycle waste, and the dreams, the phantasms, the
historical, fairylike, legendary imaginary of children and adults
is a waste product, the first great toxic excrement of a
hyperreal civilization. On a mental level, Disneyland is the
prototype of this new function. But all the sexual, psychic,
somatic recycling institutes, which proliferate in California,
belong to the same order. People no longer look at each other,
but there are institutes for that. They no longer touch each
other, but there is contactotherapy. They no longer walk, but
they go jogging, etc. Everywhere one recycles lost faculties, or
lost bodies, or lost sociality, or the lost taste for food. One
reinvents penury, asceticism, vanished savage naturalness:
natural food, health food, yoga. Marshall Sahlins's idea that it
is the economy of the market, and not of nature at all, that
secretes penury, is verified, but at a secondary level: here, in
the sophisticated confines of a triumphal market economy is
reinvented a penury/sign, a penury/simulacrum, a simulated
behavior of the underdeveloped (including the adoption of Marxist
tenets) that, in the guise of ecology, of energy crises and the
critique of capital, adds a final esoteric aureole to the triumph
of an esoteric culture. Nevertheless, maybe a mental catastrophe,
a mental implosion and involution without precedent lies in wait
for a system of this kind, whose visible signs would be those of
this strange obesity, or the incredible coexistence of the most
bizarre theories and practices, which correspond to the
improbable coalition of luxury, heaven, and money, to the
improbable luxurious materialization of life and to
undiscoverable contradictions.

## Political Incantation ##

:::{.noindent}
Watergate. The same scenario as in
Disneyland (effect of the imaginary concealing that reality no
more exists outside than inside the limits of the artificial
perimeter): here the scandal effect hiding that there is no
difference between the facts and their denunciation (identical
methods on the part of the CIA and of the *Washington Post*
journalists). Same operation, tending to regenerate through
scandal a moral and political principle, through the imaginary, a
sinking reality principle.
:::

The denunciation of scandal is always an homage to the law. And
Watergate in particular succeeded in imposing the idea that
Watergate was a scandal—in this sense it was a prodigious
operation of intoxication. A large dose of political morality
reinjected on a world scale. One could say along with Bourdieu:
"The essence of every relation of force is to dissimulate itself
as such and to acquire all its force only because it dissimulates
itself as such," understood as follows: capital, immoral and
without scruples, can only function behind a moral
superstructure, and whoever revives this public morality (through
indignation, denunciation, etc.) works spontaneously for the
order of capital. This is what the journalists of the *Washington
Post* did.

But this would be nothing but the formula of ideology, and when
Bourdieu states it, he takes the "relation of force" for the
*truth* of capitalist domination, and he himself *denounces* this
relation of force as *scandal*—he is thus in the same
deterministic and moralistic position as the *Washington Post*
journalists are. He does the same work of purging and reviving
moral order, an order of truth in which the veritable symbolic
violence of the social order is engendered, well beyond all the
relations of force, which are only its shifting and indifferent
configuration in the moral and political consciences of men.

All that capital asks of us is to receive it as rational or to
combat it in the name of rationality, to receive it as moral or
to combat it in the name of morality. Because *these are the
same*, which *can be thought of in another way*: formerly one
worked to dissimulate scandal—today one works to conceal that
there is none.

*Watergate is not a scandal*, this is what must be said at all
costs, because it is what everyone is busy concealing, this
dissimulation masking a strengthening of morality, of a moral
panic as one approaches the primitive *(mise en) scène* of
capital: its instantaneous cruelty, its incomprehensible
ferocity, its fundamental immorality—that is what is scandalous,
unacceptable to the system of moral and economic equivalence that
is the axiom of leftist thought, from the theories of the
Enlightenment up to Communism. One imputes this thinking to the
contract of capital, but it doesn't give a damn—it is a monstrous
unprincipled enterprise, nothing more. It is "enlightened"
thought that seeks to control it by imposing rules on it. And all
the recrimination that replaces revolutionary thought today comes
back to incriminate capital for not following the rules of the
game. "Power is unjust, its justice is a class justice, capital
exploits us, etc."—as if capital were linked by a contract to the
society it rules. It is the Left that holds out the mirror of
equivalence to capital hoping that it will comply, comply with
this phantasmagoria of the social contract and fulfill its
obligations to the whole of society (by the same token, no need
for revolution: it suffices that capital accommodate itself to
the rational formula of exchange).

Capital, in fact, was never linked by a contract to the society
that it dominates. It is a sorcery of social relations, it is a
*challenge to society*, and it must be responded to as such. It
is not a scandal to be denounced according to moral or economic
rationality, but a challenge to take up according to symbolic
law.

## Möbius-Spiraling Negativity ##

:::{.noindent}
Watergate was thus nothing but a lure held
out by the system to catch its adversaries—a simulation of
scandal for regenerative ends. In the film, this is embodied by
the character of "Deep Throat," who was said to be the eminence
grise of the Republicans, manipulating the left-wing journalists
in order to get rid of Nixon—and why not? All hypotheses are
possible, but this one is superfluous: the Left itself does a
perfectly good job, and spontaneously, of doing the work of the
Right. Besides, it would be naive to see an embittered good
conscience at work here. Because manipulation is a wavering
causality in which positivity and negativity are engendered and
overlap, in which there is no longer either an active or a
passive. It is through the *arbitrary* cessation of this
spiraling causality that a principle of political reality can be
saved. It is through the *simulation* of a narrow, conventional
field of perspective in which the premises and the consequences
of an act or of an event can be calculated, that a political
credibility can be maintained (and of course "objective"
analysis, the struggle, etc.). If one envisions the entire cycle
of any act or event in a system where linear continuity and
dialectical polarity no longer exist, in a field *unhinged by
simulation*, all determination evaporates, every act is
terminated at the end of the cycle having benefited everyone and
having been scattered in all directions.
:::

Is any given bombing in Italy the work of leftist extremists, or
extreme-right provocation, or a centrist mise-en-scène to
discredit all extreme terrorists and to shore up its own failing
power, or again, is it a police-inspired scenario and a form of
blackmail to public security? All of this is simultaneously true,
and the search for proof, indeed the objectivity of the facts
does not put an end to this vertigo of interpretation. That is,
we are in a logic of simulation, which no longer has anything to
do with a logic of facts and an order of reason. Simulation is
characterized by a precession of the model, of all the models
based on the merest fact—the models come first, their
circulation, orbital like that of the bomb, constitutes the
genuine magnetic field of the event. The facts no longer have a
specific trajectory, they are born at the intersection of models,
a single fact can be engendered by all the models at once. This
anticipation, this precession, this short circuit, this confusion
of the fact with its model (no more divergence of meaning, no
more dialectical polarity, no more negative electricity,
implosion of antagonistic poles), is what allows each time for
all possible interpretations, even the most contradictory—all
true, in the sense that their truth is to be exchanged, in the
image of the models from which they derive, in a generalized
cycle.

The Communists attack the Socialist Party as if they wished to
shatter the union of the Left. They give credence to the idea
that these resistances would come from a more radical political
need. In fact, it is because they no longer want power. But do
they not want power at this juncture, one unfavorable to the Left
in general, or unfavorable to them within the Union of the
Left—or do they no longer want it, by definition? When Berlinguer
declares: "There is no need to be afraid to see the Communists
take power in Italy," it simultaneously signifies:

* that there is no need to be afraid, since the Communists, if
they come to power, will change nothing of its fundamental
capitalist mechanism;
* that there is no risk that they will ever come to power
(because they don't want to) and even if they occupy the seat of
power, they will never exercise it except by proxy;
* that in fact, power, genuine power no longer exists, and thus
there is no risk whoever seizes power or seizes it again;
* but further: I, Berlinguer, am not afraid to see the Communists
take power in Italy which may seem self-evident, but not as much
as you might think, because
* it could mean the opposite (no need for psychoanalysis here): I
am afraid to see the Communists take power (and there are good
reasons for that, even for a Communist).

All of this is simultaneously true. It is the secret of a
discourse that is no longer simply ambiguous, as political
discourses can be, but that conveys the impossibility of a
determined position of power, the impossibility of a determined
discursive position. And this logic is neither that of one party
nor of another. It traverses all discourses without them wanting
it to.

Who will unravel this imbroglio? The Gordian knot can at least be
cut. The Möbius strip, if one divides it, results in a
supplementary spiral without the reversibility of surfaces being
resolved (here the reversible continuity of hypotheses). Hell of
simulation, which is no longer one of torture, but of the subtle,
maleficent, elusive twisting of meaning^[This does not
necessarily result in despairing of meaning, but just as much in
the improvisation of meaning, of nonmeaning, of many simultaneous
meanings that destroy each other.]—where even the condemned at
Burgos are still a gift from Franco to Western democracy, which
seizes the occasion to regenerate its own flagging humanism and
whose indignant protest in turn consolidates Franco's regime by
uniting the Spanish masses against this foreign intervention?
Where is the truth of all that, when such collusions admirably
knot themselves together without the knowledge of their authors?

Conjunction of the system and of its extreme alternative like the
two sides of a curved mirror, a "vicious" curvature of a
political space that is henceforth magnetized, circularized,
reversibilized from the right to the left, a torsion that is like
that of the evil spirit of commutation, the whole system, the
infinity of capital folded back on its own surface: transfinite?
And is it not the same for desire and the libidinal space?
Conjunction of desire and value, of desire and capital.
Conjunction of desire and the law, the final pleasure as the
metamorphosis of the law (which is why it is so widely the order
of the day): only capital takes pleasure, said Lyotard, before
thinking that we now take pleasure in capital. Overwhelming
versatility of desire in Deleuze, an enigmatic reversal that
brings desire "revolutionary in itself, and as if involuntarily,
wanting what it wants," to desire its own repression and to
invest in paranoid and fascist systems? A malign torsion that
returns this revolution of desire to the same fundamental
ambiguity as the other, the historical revolution.

All the referentials combine their discourses in a circular,
Möbian compulsion. Not so long ago, sex and work were fiercely
opposed terms; today both are dissolved in the same type of
demand. Formerly the discourse on history derived its power from
violently opposing itself to that of nature, the discourse of
desire to that of power—today they exchange their signifiers and
their scenarios.

It would take too long to traverse the entire range of the
operational negativity of all those scenarios of deterrence,
which, like Watergate, try to regenerate a moribund principle
through simulated scandal, phantasm, and murder—a sort of
hormonal treatment through negativity and crisis. It is always a
question of proving the real through the imaginary, proving truth
through scandal, proving the law through transgression, proving
work through striking, proving the system through crisis, and
capital through revolution, as it is elsewhere (the Tasaday) of
proving ethnology through the dispossession of its object—without
taking into account:

* the proof of theater through antitheater;
* the proof of art through antiart;
* the proof of pedagogy through antipedagogy;
* the proof of psychiatry through antipsychiatry, etc.

Everything is metamorphosed into its opposite to perpetuate
itself in its expurgated form. All the powers, all the
institutions speak of themselves through denial, in order to
attempt, by simulating death, to escape their real death throes.
Power can stage its own murder to rediscover a glimmer of
existence and legitimacy. Such was the case with some American
presidents: the Kennedys were murdered because they still had a
political dimension. The others, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, only had
the right to phantom attempts, to simulated murders. But this
aura of an artificial menace was still necessary to conceal that
they were no longer anything but the mannequins of power.
Formerly, the king (also the god) had to die, therein lay his
power. Today, he is miserably forced to feign death, in order to
preserve the *blessing* of power. But it is lost.

To seek new blood in its own death, to renew the cycle through
the mirror of crisis, negativity, and antipower: this is the only
solution—alibi of every power, of every institution attempting to
break the vicious circle of its irresponsibility and of its
fundamental nonexistence, of its already seen and of its already
dead.

## The Strategy of the Real ##

:::{.noindent}
The impossibility of rediscovering an
absolute level of the real is of the same order as the
impossibility of staging illusion. Illusion is no longer
possible, because the real is no longer possible. It is the whole
*political* problem of parody, of hypersimulation or offensive
simulation, that is posed here.
:::

For example: it would be interesting to see whether the
repressive apparatus would not react more violently to a
simulated holdup than to a real holdup. Because the latter does
nothing but disturb the order of things, the right to property,
whereas the former attacks the reality principle itself.
Transgression and violence are less serious because they only
contest the *distribution* of the real. Simulation is infinitely
more dangerous because it always leaves open to supposition that,
above and beyond its object, *law and order themselves might be
nothing but simulation*.

But the difficulty is proportional to the danger. How to feign a
violation and put it to the test? Simulate a robbery in a large
store: how to persuade security that it is a simulated robbery?
There is no "objective" difference: the gestures, the signs are
the same as for a real robbery, the signs do not lean to one side
or another. To the established order they are always of the order
of the real.

Organize a fake holdup. Verify that your weapons are harmless,
and take the most trustworthy hostage, so that no human life will
be in danger (or one lapses into the criminal). Demand a ransom,
and make it so that the operation creates as much commotion as
possible—in short, remain close to the "truth," in order to test
the reaction of the apparatus to a perfect simulacrum. You won't
be able to do it: the network of artificial signs will become
inextricably mixed up with real elements (a policeman will really
fire on sight; a client of the bank will faint and die of a heart
attack; one will actually pay you the phony ransom), in short,
you will immediately find yourself once again, without wishing
it, in the real, one of whose functions is precisely to devour
any attempt at simulation, to reduce everything to the real—that
is, to the established order itself, well before institutions and
justice come into play.

It is necessary to see in this impossibility of isolating the
process of simulation the weight of an order that cannot see and
conceive of anything but the real, because it cannot function
anywhere else. The simulation of an offense, if it is established
as such, will either be punished less severely (because it has no
"consequences") or punished as an offense against the judicial
system (for example if one sets in motion a police operation "for
nothing")—but *never as simulation* since it is precisely as such
that no equivalence with the real is possible, and hence no
repression either. The challenge of simulation is never admitted
by power. How can the simulation of virtue be punished? However,
as such it is as serious as the simulation of crime. Parody
renders submission and transgression equivalent, and that is the
most serious crime, because it *cancels out the difference upon
which the law is based*. The established order can do nothing
against it, because the law is a simulacrum of the second order,
whereas simulation is of the third order, beyond true and false,
beyond equivalences, beyond rational distinctions upon which the
whole of the social and power depend. Thus, *lacking the real*,
it is there that we must aim at order.

This is certainly why order always opts for the real. When in
doubt, it always prefers this hypothesis (as in the army one
prefers to take the simulator for a real madman). But this
becomes more and more difficult, because if it is practically
impossible to isolate the process of simulation, through the
force of inertia of the real that surrounds us, the opposite is
also true (and this reversibility itself is part of the apparatus
of simulation and the impotence of power): namely, it is *now
impossible to isolate the process of the real*, or to prove the
real.

This is how all the holdups, airplane hijackings, etc. are now in
some sense simulation holdups in that they are already inscribed
in the decoding and orchestration rituals of the media,
anticipated in their presentation and their possible
consequences. In short, where they function as a group of signs
dedicated exclusively to their recurrence as signs, and no longer
at all to their "real" end. But this does not make them harmless.
On the contrary, it is as hyperreal events, no longer with a
specific content or end, but indefinitely refracted by each other
(just like so-called historical events: strikes, demonstrations,
crises, etc.),^[Taken together, the energy crisis and the
ecological mise-en-scène are themselves a *disaster movie*, in the
same style (and with the same value) as those that currently
comprise the golden days of Hollywood. It is useless to
laboriously interpret these films in terms of their relation to
an "objective" social crisis or even to an "objective" phantasm
of disaster. It is in another sense that it must be said that it
is *the social itself that*, in contemporary discourse, *is
organised along the lines of a disaster-movie script*. (Cf. M.
Makarius, *La stratégie de la catastrophe* [The strategy of
disaster], 115.)] it is in this sense that they cannot be
controlled by an order that can only exert itself on the real and
the rational, on causes and ends, a referential order that can
only reign over the referential, a determined power that can only
reign over a determined world, but that cannot do anything
against this indefinite recurrence of simulation, against this
nebula whose weight no longer obeys the laws of gravitation of
the real, power itself ends by being dismantled in this space and
becoming a simulation of power (disconnected from its ends and
its objectives, and dedicated to the *effects of power* and mass
simulation).

The only weapon of power, its only strategy against this
defection, is to reinject the real and the referential
everywhere, to persuade us of the reality of the social, of the
gravity of the economy and the finalities of production. To this
end it prefers the discourse of crisis, but also, why not? that
of desire. "Take your desires for reality!" can be understood as
the ultimate slogan of power since in a nonreferential world,
even the confusion of the reality principle and the principle of
desire is less dangerous than contagious hyperreality. One
remains among principles, and among those power is always in the
right.

Hyperreality and simulation are deterrents of every principle and
every objective, they turn against power the deterrent that it
used so well for such a long time. Because in the end, throughout
its history it was capital that first fed on the destructuration
of every referential, of every human objective, that shattered
every ideal distinction between true and false, good and evil, in
order to establish a radical law of equivalence and exchange, the
iron law of its power. Capital was the first to play at
deterrence, abstraction, disconnection, deterritorialization,
etc., and if it is the one that fostered reality, the reality
principle, it was also the first to liquidate it by exterminating
all use value, all real equivalence of production and wealth, in
the very sense we have of the unreality of the stakes and the
omnipotence of manipulation. Well, today it is this same logic
that is even more set against capital. And as soon as it wishes
to combat this disastrous spiral by secreting a last glimmer of
reality, on which to establish a last glimmer of power, it does
nothing but multiply the *signs* and accelerate the play of
simulation.

As long as the historical threat came at it from the real, power
played at deterrence and simulation, disintegrating all the
contradictions by dint of producing equivalent signs. Today when
the danger comes at it from simulation (that of being dissolved
in the play of signs), power plays at the real, plays at crisis,
plays at remanufacturing artificial, social, economic, and
political stakes. For power, it is a question of life and death.
But it is too late.

Whence the characteristic hysteria of our times: that of the
production and reproduction of the real. The other production,
that of values and commodities, that of the belle epoque of
political economy, has for a long time had no specific meaning.
What every society looks for in continuing to produce, and to
overproduce, is to restore the real that escapes it. That is why
*today this "material" production is that of the hyperreal
itself*. It retains all the features, the whole discourse of
traditional production, but it is no longer anything but its
scaled-down refraction (thus hyper-realists fix a real from which
all meaning and charm, all depth and energy of representation
have vanished in a hallucinatory resemblance). Thus everywhere
the hyperrealism of simulation is translated by the hallucinatory
resemblance of the real to itself.

Power itself has for a long time produced nothing but the *signs*
of its resemblance. And at the same time, another figure of power
comes into play: that of a collective demand for signs of power—a
holy union that is reconstructed around its disappearance. The
whole world adheres to it more or less in terror of the collapse
of the political. And in the end the game of power becomes
nothing but the *critical* obsession with power—obsession with
its death, obsession with its survival, which increases as it
disappears. When it has totally disappeared, we will logically be
under the total hallucination of power—a haunting memory that is
already in evidence everywhere, expressing at once the compulsion
to get rid of it (no one wants it anymore, everyone unloads it on
everyone else) and the panicked nostalgia over its loss. The
melancholy of societies without power: this has already stirred
up fascism, that overdose of a strong referential in a society
that cannot terminate its mourning.

With the extenuation of the political sphere, the president comes
increasingly to resemble that *Puppet of Power* who is the head
of primitive societies (Clastres).

All previous presidents pay for and continue to pay for Kennedy's
murder as if they were the ones who had suppressed it—which is
true phantasmatically, if not in fact. They must efface this
defect and this complicity with their simulated murder. Because,
now it can only be simulated. Presidents Johnson and Ford were
both the object of failed assassination attempts which, they were
not staged, were at least perpetrated by simulation. The Kennedys
died because they incarnated something: the political, political
substance, whereas the new presidents are nothing but caricatures
and fake film curiously, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, all have this
simian mug, the monkeys of power.

Death is never an absolute criterion, but in this case it is
significant: the era of James Dean, Marilyn Monroe, and the
Kennedys, of those who really died simply because they had a
mythic dimension that implies death (not for romantic reasons,
but because of the fundamental principle of reversal and
exchange)—this era is long gone. It is now the era of murder by
simulation, of the generalized aesthetic of simulation, of the
murder-alibi the allegorical resurrection of death, which is only
there to sanction the institution of power, without which it no
longer has any substance or an autonomous reality.

These staged presidential assassinations are revealing because
they signal the status of all negativity in the West: political
opposition, the "Left," critical discourse, etc.—a simulacral
contrast through which power attempts to break the vicious circle
of its nonexistence, of its fundamental irresponsibility, of its
"suspension." Power floats like money, like language, like
theory. Criticism and negativity alone still secrete a phantom of
the reality of power. If they become weak for one reason or
another, power has no other recourse but to artificially revive
and hallucinate them.

It is in this way that the Spanish executions still serve as a
stimulant to Western liberal democracy, to a dying system of
democratic values. Fresh blood, but for how much longer? The
deterioration of all power is irresistibly pursued: it is not so
much the "revolutionary forces" that accelerate this process
(often it is quite the opposite), it is the system itself that
deploys against its own structures this violence that annuls all
substance and all finality. One must not resist this process by
trying to confront the system and destroy it, because this system
that is dying from being dispossessed of its death expects
nothing but that from us: that we give the system back its death,
that we revive it through the negative. End of revolutionary
praxis, end of the dialectic. Curiously, Nixon, who was not even
found worthy of dying at the hands of the most insignificant,
chance, unbalanced person (and though it is perhaps true that
presidents are assassinated by unbalanced types, this changes
*nothing*: the leftist penchant for detecting a rightist
conspiracy beneath this brings out a false problem—the function
of bringing death to, or the prophecy, etc., against power has
always been fulfilled, from primitive societies to the present,
by demented people, crazy people, or neurotics, who nonetheless
carry out a social function as fundamental as that of
presidents), was nevertheless ritually put to death by Watergate.
Watergate is still a mechanism for the ritual murder of power
(the American institution of the presidency is much more
thrilling in this regard than the European: it surrounds itself
with all the violence and vicissitudes of primitive powers, of
savage rituals). But already impeachment is no longer
assassination: it happens via the Constitution. Nixon has
nevertheless arrived at the goal of which all power dreams: to be
taken seriously enough, to constitute a mortal enough danger to
the group to be one day relieved of his duties, denounced, and
liquidated. Ford doesn't even have this opportunity anymore: a
simulacrum of an already dead power, he can only accumulate
against himself the signs of reversion through murder—in fact, he
is immunized by his impotence, which infuriates him.

In contrast to the primitive rite, which foresees the official
and sacrificial death of the king (the king or the chief is
nothing without the promise of his sacrifice), the modern
political imaginary goes increasingly in the direction of
delaying, of concealing for as long as possible, the death of the
head of state. This obsession has accumulated since the era of
revolutions and of charismatic leaders: Hitler, Franco, Mao,
having no "legitimate" heirs, no filiation of power, see
themselves forced to perpetuate themselves indefinitely—popular
myth never wishes to believe them dead. The pharaohs already did
this: it was always one and the same person who incarnated the
successive pharaohs.

Everything happens as if Mao or Franco had already died several
times and had been replaced by his double. From a political point
of view, that a head of state remains the same or is someone else
doesn't strictly change anything, so long as they resemble each
other. For a long time now a head of state—*no matter which
one*—is nothing but the simulacrum of himself, and *only that
gives him the power and the quality to govern*. No one would
grant the least consent, the least devotion to a real person. It
is to his double, he being always already *dead*, to which
allegiance is given. This myth does nothing but translate the
persistence, and at the same time the deception, of the necessity
of the king's sacrificial death.

We are still in the same boat: no society knows how to mourn the
real, power, the *social itself*, which is implicated in the same
loss. And it is through an artificial revitalization of all this
that we try to escape this fact. *This situation will no doubt
end up giving rise to socialism*. Through an unforeseen turn of
events and via an irony that is no longer that of history, it is
from the death of the social that socialism will emerge, as it is
from the death of God that religions emerge. A twisted advent, a
perverse event, an unintelligible reversion to the logic of
reason. As is the fact that power is in essence no longer present
except to conceal that there is no more power. A simulation that
can last indefinitely, because, as distinct from "true"
power—which is, or was, a structure, a strategy, a relation of
force, a stake—it is nothing but the object of a social *demand*,
and thus as the object of the law of supply and demand, it is no
longer subject to violence and death. Completely purged of a
*political* dimension, it, like any other commodity, is dependent
on mass production and consumption. Its spark has disappeared,
only the fiction of a political universe remains.

The same holds true for work. The spark of production, the
violence of its stakes no longer exist. The whole world still
produces, and increasingly, but subtly work has become something
else: a need (as Marx ideally envisioned it but not in the same
sense), the object of a social "demand," like leisure, to which
it is equivalent in the course of everyday life. A demand exactly
proportional to the loss of a stake in the work process.^[To this
flagging investment in work corresponds a parallel decline in the
investment in consumption. Goodbye to use value or to the
prestige of the automobile, goodbye amorous discourses that
neatly opposed the object of enjoyment to the object of work.
Another discourse takes hold that is a *discourse of work on the
object of consumption* aiming for an active, constraining, puritan
reinvestment (use less gas, watch out for your safety, you've
gone over the speed limit, etc.) to which the characteristics of
automobiles pretend to adapt. Rediscovering a stake through the
transposition of these two poles. Work becomes the object of a
need, the car becomes the object of work. There is no better
proof of the lack of differentiation among all the stakes. It is
through the same slippage between the "right" to vote and
electoral "duty" that the divestment of the political sphere is
signaled.] Same change in fortune as for power: the *scenario* of
work is there to conceal that the real of work, the real of
production, has disappeared. And the real of the strike as well,
which is no longer a work stoppage, but its alternate pole in the
ritual scansion of the social calendar. Everything occurs as if
each person had, after declaring a strike, "occupied" his place
and work station and recommenced production, as is the norm in a
"self-managed" occupation, exactly in the same terms as before,
all while declaring himself (and in virtually being) permanently
on strike.

This is not a dream out of science fiction: everywhere it is a
question of doubling the process of work. And of a doubling of
the process of going on strike—striking incorporated just as
obsolescence is in objects, just as crisis is in production. So,
there is no longer striking, nor work, but both simultaneously,
that is to say something else: a *magic of work*, a trompe
l'oeil, a scenodrama (so as not to say a melodrama) of
production, a collective dramaturgy on the empty stage of the
social.

It is no longer a question of the ideology of work—the
traditional ethic that would obscure the "real" process of work
and the "objective" process of exploitation—but of the scenario
of work. In the same way, it is no longer a question of the
ideology of power, but of the *scenario* of power. Ideology only
corresponds to a corruption of reality through signs; simulation
corresponds to a short circuit of reality and to its duplication
through signs. It is always the goal of the ideological analysis
to restore the objective process, it is always a false problem to
wish to restore the truth beneath the simulacrum.

This is why in the end power is so much in tune with ideological
discourses and discourses on ideology, that is they are
discourses of *truth*—always good for countering the mortal blows
of simulation, even and especially if they are revolutionary.

## The End of the Panopticon ##

:::{.noindent}
It is still to this ideology of lived experience—exhumation of
the real in its fundamental banality, in its radical
authenticity—that the American TV verité experiment attempted on
the Loud family in 1971 refers: seven months of uninterrupted
shooting, three hundred hours of nonstop broadcasting, without a
script or a screenplay, the odyssey of a family, its dramas, its
joys, its unexpected events, nonstop—in short, a "raw" historical
document, and the "greatest television performance, comparable,
on the scale of our day-to-day life, to the footage of our landing
on the moon." It becomes more complicated because this family
fell apart during the filming: a crisis erupted, the Louds
separated, etc. Whence that insoluble controversy: was TV itself
responsible? What would have happened if TV *hadn't been there?*
:::

More interesting is the illusion of filming the Louds *as if TV
weren't there*. The producer's triumph was to say: "They lived as
if we were not there." An absurd, paradoxical formula—neither
true nor false: Utopian. The "as if we were not there" being
equal to "as if you were there." It is this Utopia, this paradox
that fascinated the twenty million viewers, much more than did
the "perverse" pleasure of violating someone's privacy. In the
"verité" experience it is not a question of secrecy or
perversion, but of a sort of frisson of the real, or of an
aesthetics of the hyperreal, a frisson of vertiginous and phony
exactitude, a frisson of simultaneous distancing and
magnification, of distortion of scale, of an excessive
transparency. The pleasure of an excess of meaning, when the bar
of the sign falls below the usual waterline of meaning: the
nonsignifier is exalted by the camera angle. There one sees what
the real never was (but "as if you were there"), without the
distance that gives us perspectival space and depth vision (but
"more real than nature"). Pleasure in the microscopic simulation
that allows the real to pass into the hyperreal. (This is also
somewhat the case in porno, which is fascinating more on a
metaphysical than on a sexual level.)

Besides, this family was already hyperreal by the very nature of
its selection: a typical ideal American family, California home,
three garages, five children, assured social and professional
status, decorative housewife, upper-middle-class standing. In a
way it is this statistical perfection that dooms it to death.
Ideal heroine of the American way of life, it is, as in ancient
sacrifices, chosen in order to be glorified and to die beneath
the flames of the medium, a modern *fatum*. Because heavenly fire
no longer falls on corrupted cities, it is the camera lens that,
like a laser, comes to pierce lived reality in order to put it to
death. "The Louds: simply a family who agreed to deliver
themselves into the hands of television, and to die by it," the
director will say. Thus it is a question of a sacrificial
process, of a sacrificial spectacle offered to twenty million
Americans. The liturgical drama of a mass society.

TV verité. A term admirable in its ambiguity, does it refer to
the truth of this family or to the truth of TV? In fact, it is TV
that is the truth of the Louds, it is TV that is true, it is TV
that renders true. Truth that is no longer the reflexive truth of
the mirror, nor the perspectival truth of the panoptic system and
of the gaze, but the manipulative truth of the test that sounds
out and interrogates, of the laser that touches and pierces, of
computer cards that retain your preferred sequences, of the
genetic code that controls your combinations, of cells that
inform your sensory universe. It is to this truth that the Loud
family was subjected by the medium of TV, and in this sense it
amounts to a death sentence (but is it still a question of
truth?).

*End of the panoptic system*. The eye of TV is no longer the
source of an absolute gaze, and the ideal of control is no longer
that of transparency. This still presupposes an objective space
(that of the Renaissance) and the omnipotence of the despotic
gaze. It is still, if not a system of confinement, at least a
system of mapping. More subtly, but always externally, playing on
the opposition of seeing and being seen, even if the panoptic
focal point may be blind.

Something else in regard to the Louds. "You no longer watch TV,
it is TV that watches you (live)," or again: "You are no longer
listening to Don't Panic, it is Don't Panic that is listening to
you"—a switch from the panoptic mechanism of surveillance
(*Discipline and Punish* [Surveiller et punir]) to a system of
deterrence, in which the distinction between the passive and the
active is abolished. There is no longer any imperative of
submission to the model, or to the gaze "[you]{.smallcaps} are
the model!" "[you]{.smallcaps} are the majority!" Such is the
watershed of a hyperreal sociality, in which the real is confused
with the model, as in the statistical operation, or with the
medium, as in the Louds' operation. Such is the last stage of the
social relation, ours, which is no longer one of persuasion (the
classical age of propaganda, of ideology, of publicity, etc.) but
one of deterrence: "[you]{.smallcaps} are information, you are
the social, you are the event, you are involved, you have the
word, etc." An about-face through which it becomes impossible to
locate one instance of the model, of power, of the gaze, of the
medium itself, because you are always already on the other side.
No more subject, no more focal point, no more center or
periphery: pure flexion or circular inflexion. No more violence
or surveillance: only "information," secret virulence, chain
reaction, slow implosion, and simulacra of spaces in which the
effect of the real again comes into play.

We are witnessing the end of perspectival and panoptic space
(which remains a moral hypothesis bound up with all the classical
analyses on the "objective" essence of power), and thus to the
*very abolition of the spectacular*. Television, for example in
the case of the Louds, is no longer a spectacular medium. We are
no longer in the society of the spectacle, of which the
situationists spoke, nor in the specific kinds of alienation and
repression that it implied. The medium itself is no longer
identifiable as such, and the confusion of the medium and the
message (McLuhan)[^7] is the first great formula of this new era.
There is no longer a medium in the literal sense: it is now
intangible, diffused, and diffracted in the real, and one can no
longer even say that the medium is altered by it.

Such a blending, such a viral, endemic, chronic, alarming
presence of the medium, without the possibility of isolating the
effects—spectralized, like these advertising laser sculptures in
the empty space of the event filtered by the medium—dissolution
of TV in life, dissolution of life in TV—indiscernible chemical
solution: we are all Louds doomed not to invasion, to pressure,
to violence and blackmail by the media and the models, but to
their induction, to their infiltration, to their illegible
violence.

But one must watch out for the negative turn that discourse
imposes: it is a question neither of disease nor of a viral
infection. One must think instead of the media as if they were,
in outer orbit, a kind of genetic code that directs the mutation
of the real into the hyperreal, just as the other micromolecular
code controls the passage from a representative sphere of meaning
to the genetic one of the programmed signal.

It is the whole traditional world of causality that is in
question: the perspectival, determinist mode, the "active,"
critical mode, the analytic mode—the distinction between cause
and effect, between active and passive, between subject and
object, between the end and the means. It is in this sense that
one can say: TV is watching us, TV alienates us, TV manipulates
us, TV informs us … In all this, one remains dependent on the
analytical conception of the media, on an external active and
effective agent, on "perspectival" information with the horizon
of the real and of meaning as the vanishing point.

Now, one must conceive of TV along the lines of DNA as an effect
in which the opposing poles of determination vanish, according to
a nuclear contraction, retraction, of the old polar schema that
always maintained a minimal distance between cause and effect,
between subject and object: precisely the distance of meaning,
the gap, the difference, the smallest possible gap (PPEP!),^[PPEP
is an acronym for smallest possible gap, or "plus petit écart
possible."—[Trans]{.smallcaps}.] irreducible under pain of
reabsorption into an aleatory and indeterminate process whose
discourse can no longer account for it, because it is itself a
determined order.

It is this gap that vanishes in the process of genetic coding, in
which indeterminacy is not so much a question of molecular
randomness as of the abolition, pure and simple, of the relation.
In the process of molecular control, which "goes" from the DNA
nucleus to the "substance" that it "informs," there is no longer
the traversal of an effect, of an energy, of a determination, of
a message. "Order, signal, impulse, message": all of these
attempt to render the thing intelligible to us, but by analogy,
retranscribing in terms of inscription, of a vector, of decoding,
a dimension of which we know nothing—it is no longer even a
"dimension," or perhaps it is the fourth (which is defined,
however, in Einsteinian relativity by the absorption of the
distinct poles of space and time). In fact, this whole process
can only be understood in its negative form: nothing separates
one pole from another anymore, the beginning from the end; there
is a kind of contraction of one over the other, a fantastic
telescoping, a collapse of the two traditional poles into each
other: *implosion*—an absorption of the radiating mode of
causality, of the differential mode of determination, with its
positive and negative charge—an implosion of meaning. *That is
where simulation begins*.

Everywhere, in no matter what domain—political, biological,
psychological, mediatized in which the distinction between these
two poles can no longer be maintained, one enters into
simulation, and thus into absolute manipulation—not into
passivity, but into *the differentiation of the active and the
passive*. DNA realizes this aleatory reduction at the level of
living matter. Television, in the case of the Louds, also reaches
this indefinite limit in which, vis-à-vis TV, they are neither
more nor less active or passive than a living substance is
vis-à-vis its molecular code. Here and there, a single nebula
whose simple elements are indecipherable, whose truth is
indecipherable.

## The Orbital and the Nuclear ##

:::{.noindent}
The apotheosis of simulation: the nuclear. However, the balance
of terror is never anything but the spectacular slope of a system
of deterrence that has insinuated itself from the *inside* into
all the cracks of daily life. Nuclear suspension only serves to
seal the trivialized system of deterrence that is at the heart of
the media, of the violence without consequences that reigns
throughout the world, of the aleatory apparatus of all the
choices that are made for us. The most insignificant of our
behaviors is regulated by neutralized, indifferent, equivalent
signs, by zero-sum signs like those that regulate the "strategy
of games" (but the true equation is elsewhere, and the unknown is
precisely that variable of simulation which makes of the atomic
arsenal itself a hyperreal form, a simulacrum that dominates
everything and reduces all "ground-level" events to being nothing
but ephemeral scenarios, transforming the life left us into
survival, into a stake without stakes—not even into a life
insurance policy: into a policy that already has no value).
:::

It is not the direct threat of atomic destruction that paralyzes
our lives, it is deterrence that gives them leukemia. And this
deterrence comes from that fact that *even the real atomic clash
is precluded*—precluded like the eventuality of the real in a
system of signs. The whole world pretends to believe in the
reality of this threat (this is understandable on the part of the
military, the gravity of their exercise and the discourse of
their "strategy" are at stake), but it is precisely at this level
that there are no strategic stakes. The whole originality of the
situation lies in the improbability of destruction.

Deterrence precludes war—the archaic violence of expanding
systems. Deterrence itself is the neutral, implosive violence of
metastable systems or systems in involution. There is no longer a
subject of deterrence, nor an adversary nor a strategy—it is a
planetary structure of the annihilation of stakes. Atomic war,
like the Trojan War, will not take place. The risk of nuclear
annihilation only serves as a pretext, through the sophistication
of weapons (a sophistication that surpasses any possible
objective to such an extent that it is itself a symptom of
nullity), for installing a universal security system, a universal
lockup and control system whose deterrent effect is not at all
aimed at an atomic clash (which was never in question, except
without a doubt in the very initial stages of the cold war, when
one still confused the nuclear apparatus with conventional war)
but, rather, at the much greater probability of any real event,
of anything that would be an event in the general system and
upset its balance. The balance of terror is the terror of
balance.

Deterrence is not a strategy, it circulates and is exchanged
between nuclear protagonists exactly as is international capital
in the orbital zone of monetary speculation whose fluctuations
suffice to control all global exchanges. Thus the *money of
destruction* (without any reference to real destruction, any more
than floating capital has a real referent of production) that
circulates in nuclear orbit suffices to control all the violence
and potential conflicts around the world.

What is hatched in the shadow of this mechanism with the pretext
of a maximal, "objective," threat, and thanks to Damocles'
nuclear sword, is the perfection of the best system of control
that has ever existed. And the progressive satellization of the
whole planet through this hypermodel of security.

The same goes for *peaceful* nuclear power stations. Pacification
does not distinguish between the civil and the military:
everywhere where irreversible apparatuses of control are
elaborated, everywhere where the notion of security becomes
omnipotent, everywhere where the *norm* replaces the old arsenal
of laws and violence (including war), it is the system of
deterrence that grows, and around it grows the historical,
social, and political desert. A gigantic involution that makes
every conflict, every finality, every confrontation contract in
proportion to this blackmail that interrupts, neutralizes,
freezes them all. No longer can any revolt, any story be deployed
according to its own logic because it risks annihilation. No
strategy is possible any longer, and escalation is only a puerile
game given over to the military. The political stake is dead,
only simulacra of conflicts and carefully circumscribed stakes
remain.

The "space race" played exactly the same role as nuclear
escalation. This is why the space program was so easily able to
replace it in the 1960s (Kennedy/Khrushchev), or to develop
concurrently as a form of "peaceful coexistence." Because what,
ultimately, is the function of the space program, of the conquest
of the moon, of the launching of satellites if not the
institution of a model of universal gravitation, of satellization
of which the lunar module is the perfect embryo? Programmed
microcosm, where *nothing can be left to chance*. Trajectory,
energy, calculation, physiology, psychology, environment—nothing
can be left to contingencies, this is the total universe of the
norm the Law no longer exists, it is the operational immanence of
every detail that is law. A universe purged of all threat of
meaning, in a state of asepsis and weightlessness—it is this very
perfection that is fascinating. The exaltation of the crowds was
not a response to the event of landing on the moon or of sending
a man into space (this would be, rather, the fulfillment of an
earlier dream), rather, we are dumbfounded by the perfection of
the programming and the technical manipulation, by the immanent
wonder of the programmed unfolding of events. Fascination with
the maximal norm and the mastery of probability. Vertigo of the
model, which unites with the model of death, but without fear or
drive. Because if the law, with its aura of transgression, if
order, with its aura of violence, still taps a perverse
imaginary, the norm fixes, fascinates, stupefies, and makes every
imaginary involute. One no longer fantasizes about the minutiae
of a program. Just watching it produces vertigo. The vertigo of a
world without flaws.

Now, it is the same model of programmatic infallibility, of
maximum security and deterrence that today controls the spread of
the social. There lies the true nuclear fallout: the meticulous
operation of technology serves as a model for the meticulous
operation of the social. Here as well, *nothing will be left to
chance*, moreover this is the essence of socialization, which
began centuries ago, but which has now entered its accelerated
phase, toward a limit that one believed would be explosive
(revolution), but which for the moment is translated by an
inverse, *implosive*, irreversible process: the generalized
deterrence of chance, of accident, of transversality, of
finality, of contradiction, rupture, or complexity in a sociality
illuminated by the norm, doomed to the descriptive transparency
of mechanisms of information. In fact, the spatial and nuclear
models do not have their own ends: neither the discovery of the
moon, nor military and strategic superiority. Their truth is to
be the models of simulation, the model vectors of a system of
planetary control (where even the superpowers of this scenario
are not free—the whole world is satellized).^[Paradox: all bombs
are clean: their only pollution is the system of security and of
control they radiate *as long as they don't explode*.]

Resist the evidence: in satellization, he who is satellized is
not who one might think. Through the orbital inscription of a
spatial object, it is the planet earth that becomes a satellite,
it is the terrestrial principle of reality that becomes
eccentric, hyperreal, and insignificant. Through the orbital
instantiation of a system of control like peaceful coexistence,
all the terrestrial microsystems are satellized and lose their
autonomy. All energy, all events are absorbed by this eccentric
gravitation, everything condenses and implodes toward the only
micromodel of control (the orbital satellite), as conversely, in
the other, biological, dimension, everything converges and
implodes on the molecular micromodel of the genetic code. Between
the two, in this forking of the nuclear and the genetic, in the
simultaneous assumption of the two fundamental codes of
deterrence, every principle of meaning is absorbed, every
deployment of the real is impossible.

The simultaneity of two events in the month of July 1975
illustrated this in a striking manner: the linkup in space of the
two American and Soviet supersatellites, apotheosis of peaceful
coexistence—the suppression by the Chinese of ideogrammatic
writing and conversion to the Roman alphabet. The latter
signifies the "orbital" instantiation of an abstract and
modelized system of signs, into whose orbit all the once unique
forms of style and writing will be reabsorbed. The satellization
of language: the means for the Chinese to enter the system of
peaceful coexistence, which is inscribed in their heavens at
precisely the same time by the linkup of the two satellites.
Orbital flight of the Big Two, neutralization and homogenization
of everyone else on earth.

Yet, despite this deterrence by the orbital power—the nuclear or
molecular code—events continue at ground level, misfortunes are
even more numerous, given the global process of the contiguity
and simultaneity of data. But, subtly, they no longer have any
meaning, they are no longer anything but the duplex effect of
simulation at the summit. The best example can only be that of
the war in Vietnam, because it took place at the intersection of
a maximum historical and "revolutionary" stake, and of the
installation of this deterrent authority. What meaning did this
war have, and wasn't its unfolding a means of sealing the end of
history in the decisive and culminating historic event of our
era?

Why did this war, so hard, so long, so ferocious, vanish from one
day to the next as if by magic?

Why did this American defeat (the largest reversal in the history
of the USA) have no internal repercussions in America? If it had
really signified the failure of the planetary strategy of the
United States, it would necessarily have completely disrupted its
internal balance and the American political system. Nothing of
the sort occurred.

Something else, then, took place. This war, at bottom, was
nothing but a crucial episode of peaceful coexistence. It marked
the arrival of China to peaceful coexistence. The nonintervention
of China obtained and secured after many years, China's
apprenticeship to a global modus vivendi, the shift from a global
strategy of revolution to one of shared forces and empires, the
transition from a radical alternative to political alternation in
a system now essentially regulated (the normalization of
Peking—Washington relations): this was what was at stake in the
war in Vietnam, and in this sense, the USA pulled out of Vietnam
but won the war.

And the war ended "spontaneously" when this objective was
achieved. That is why it was deescalated, demobilized so easily.

This same reduction of forces can be seen on the field. The war
lasted as long as elements irreducible to a healthy politics and
discipline of power, even a Communist one, remained unliquidated.
When at last the war had passed into the hands of regular troops
in the North and escaped that of the resistance, the war could
stop: it had attained its objective. The stake is thus that of a
political relay. As soon as the Vietnamese had proved that they
were no longer the carriers of an unpredictable subversion, one
could let them take over. That theirs is a Communist order is not
serious in the end: it had proved itself, it could be trusted. It
is even more effective than capitalism in the liquidation of
"savage" and archaic precapitalist structures.

Same scenario in the Algerian war.

The other aspect of this war and of all wars today: behind the
armed violence, the murderous antagonism of the adversaries—which
seems a matter of life and death, which is played out as such (or
else one could never send people to get themselves killed in this
kind of thing), behind this simulacrum of fighting to the death
and of ruthless global stakes, the two adversaries are
fundamentally in solidarity against something else, unnamed,
never spoken, but whose objective outcome in war, with the equal
complicity of the two adversaries, is total liquidation. Tribal,
communitarian, precapitalist structures, every form of exchange,
of language, of symbolic organization, that is what must be
abolished, that is the object of murder in war—and war itself, in
its immense, spectacular death apparatus, is nothing but the
medium of this process of the terrorist rationalization of the
social—the murder on which sociality will be founded, whatever
its allegiance, Communist or capitalist. Total complicity, or
division of labor between two adversaries (who may even consent
to enormous sacrifices for it) for the very end of reshaping and
domesticating social relations.

"The North Vietnamese were advised to countenance a scenario for
liquidating the American presence in the course of which, of
course, one must save face."

This scenario: the extremely harsh bombardments of Hanoi. Their
untenable character must not conceal the fact that they were
nothing but a simulacrum to enable the Vietnamese to seem to
countenance a compromise and for Nixon to make the Americans
swallow the withdrawal of their troops. The game was already won,
nothing was objectively at stake but the verisimilitude of the
final montage.

The moralists of war, the holders of high wartime values should
not be too discouraged: the war is no less atrocious for being
only a simulacrum—the flesh suffers just the same, and the dead
and former combatants are worth the same as in other wars. This
objective is always fulfilled, just like that of the charting of
territories and of disciplinary sociality. What no longer exists
is the adversity of the adversaries, the reality of antagonistic
causes, the ideological seriousness of war. And also the reality
of victory or defeat, war being a process that triumphs well
beyond these appearances.

In any case, the pacification (or the deterrence) that dominates
us today is beyond war and peace, it is that at every moment war
and peace are equivalent. "War is peace," said Orwell. There
also, the two differential poles implode into each other, or
recycle one another—a simultaneity of contradictions that is at
once the parody and the end of every dialectic. Thus one can
completely miss the truth of a war: namely, that it was finished
well before it started, that there was an end to war at the heart
of the war itself, and that perhaps it never started. Many other
events (the oil crisis, etc.) *never started*, never existed,
except as artificial occurrences—abstract, ersatz, and as
artifacts of history, catastrophes and crises destined to
maintain a historical investment under hypnosis. The media and
the official *news service* are only there to maintain the
illusion of an actuality, of the reality of the stakes, of the
objectivity of facts. All the events are to be read backward, or
one becomes aware (as with the Communists "in power" in Italy the
retro, posthumous rediscovery of the gulags and Soviet dissidents
like the almost contemporary discovery, by a moribund ethnology,
of the lost "difference" of Savages) that all these things
arrived too late, with a history of delay, a spiral of delay,
that they long ago exhausted their meaning and only live from an
artificial effervescence of signs, that all these events succeed
each other without logic, in the most contradictory, complete
equivalence, in a profound indifference to their consequences
(but this is because there are none: they exhaust themselves in
their spectacular promotion)—all "newsreel" footage thus gives
the sinister impression of kitsch, of retro and porno at the same
time doubtless everyone knows this, and no one really accepts it.
The reality of simulation is unbearable—crueler than Artaud's
Theater of Cruelty, which was still an attempt to create a
dramaturgy of life, the last gasp of an ideality of the body, of
blood, of violence in a system that was already taking it away,
toward a reabsorption of all the stakes without a trace of blood.
For us the trick has been played. All dramaturgy, and even all
real writing of cruelty has disappeared. Simulation is the
master, and we only have a right to the retro, to the phantom,
parodic rehabilitation of all lost referentials. Everything still
unfolds around us, in the cold light of deterrence (including
Artaud, who has the right like everything else to his revival, to
a second existence as the *referential* of cruelty).

This is why nuclear proliferation does not increase the risk of
either an atomic clash or an accident—save in the interval when
the "young" powers could be tempted to make a nondeterrent,
"real" use of it (as the Americans did in Hiroshima—but precisely
only they had a right to this "use value" of the bomb, all of
those who have acquired it since will be deterred from using it
by the very fact of possessing it). Entry into the atomic club,
so prettily named, very quickly effaces (as unionization does in
the working world) any inclination toward violent intervention.
Responsibility, control, censure, self-deterrence always grow
more rapidly than the forces or the weapons at our disposal: this
is the secret of the social order. Thus the very possibility of
paralyzing a whole country by flicking a switch *makes* it so
that the electrical engineers will never use this weapon: the
whole myth of the total and revolutionary strike crumbles at the
very moment when the means are available—but alas *precisely
because* those means are available. Therein lies the whole
process of deterrence.

It is thus perfectly probable that one day we will see nuclear
powers export atomic reactors, weapons, and bombs to every
latitude. Control by threat will be replaced by the more
effective strategy of pacification through the bomb and through
the possession of the bomb. The "little" powers, believing that
they are buying their independent striking force, will buy the
virus of deterrence, of their own deterrence. The same goes for
the atomic reactors that we have already sent them: so many
neutron bombs knocking out all historical virulence, all risk of
explosion. In this sense, the nuclear everywhere inaugurates an
accelerated process of *implosion*, it freezes everything around
it, it absorbs all living energy.

The nuclear is at once the culminating point of available energy
and the maximization of energy control systems. Lockdown and
control increase in direct proportion to (and undoubtedly even
faster than) liberating potentialities. This was already the
aporia of the modern revolution. It is still the absolute paradox
of the nuclear. Energies freeze in their own fire, they deter
themselves. One can no longer imagine what project, what power,
what strategy, what subject could exist behind this enclosure,
this vast saturation of a system by its own forces, now
neutralized, unusable, unintelligible, nonexplosive except for
the possibility of *an explosion toward the center*, of an
*implosion* where all these energies would be abolished in a
catastrophic process (in the literal sense, that is to say in the
sense of a reversion of the whole cycle toward a minimal point,
of a reversion of energies toward a minimal threshold).

[^7]: The medium/message confusion is certainly a corollary of
that between the sender and the receiver, thus sealing the
disappearance of all dual, polar structures that formed the
discursive organization of language, of all determined
articulation of meaning reflecting Jakobson's famous grid of
functions. That discourse "circulates" is to be taken literally:
that is, it no longer goes from one point to another, but it
traverses a cycle that *without distinction* includes the positions
of transmitter and receiver, now unlocatable as such. Thus there
is no instance of power, no instance of transmission—power is
something that circulates and whose source can no longer be
located, a cycle in which the positions of the dominator and the
dominated are exchanged in an endless reversion that is also the
end of power in its classical definition. The circularization of
power, of knowledge, of discourse puts an end to any localization
of instances and poles. In the psychoanalytic interpretation
itself, the "power" of the interpreter does not come from any
outside instance but from the interpreted himself. This changes
everything, because one can always ask of the traditional holders
of power where they get their power from. Who made you duke? The
king. Who made you king? God. Only God no longer answers. But to
the question: who made you a psychoanalyst? the analyst can well
reply: You. Thus is expressed, by an inverse simulation, the
passage from the "analyzed" to the "analysand," from passive to
active, which simply describes the spiraling effect of the
shifting of poles, the effect of circularity in which power is
lost, is dissolved, is resolved in perfect manipulation (it is no
longer of the order of directive power and of the gaze, but of
the order of tactility and commutation). See also the
state/family circularity assured by the fluctuation and
metastatic regulation of the images of the social and the private
(J. Donzelot, *La police des familles* [The policing of families]).

    Impossible now to pose the famous question: "From what
position do you speak?" "How do you know?" "From where do you get
your power?" without hearing the immediate response: "But it is
of you (from you) that I speak"—meaning, it is you who are
speaking, you who know, you who are the power. Gigantic
circumvolution, circumlocution of the spoken word, which is equal
to a blackmail with no end, to a deterrence that cannot be
appealed of the subject presumed to speak, leaving him without a
reply, because to the question that he poses one ineluctably
replies: but *you are the answer*, or: your question is already an
answer, etc.—the whole strangulatory sophistication of
intercepting speech, of the forced confession in the guise of
freedom of expression, of trapping the subject in his own
interrogation, of the precession of the reply to the question
(all the violence of interpretation lies there, as well as that
of the conscious or unconscious management of the "spoken word"
[*parole*]).

    This simulacrum of the inversion or the involution of poles,
this clever subterfuge, which is the secret of the whole
discourse of manipulation and thus, today, in every domain, the
secret of any new power in the erasure of the scene of power, in
the assumption of all words from which has resulted this
fantastic silent majority characteristic of our time—all of this
started without a doubt in the political sphere with the
democractic simulacrum, which today is the substitution for the
power of God with the power of the people as the source of power,
and of power as *emanation* with power as *representation*.
Anti-Copernican revolution: no transcendental instance either of
the sun or of the luminous sources of power and
knowledge—everything comes from the people and everything returns
to them. It is with this magnificent recycling that the universal
simulacrum of manipulation, from the scenario of mass suffrage to
the present-day phantoms of opinion polls, begins to be put in
place.
