# *Holocaust* #

:::{.initial}
Forgetting extermination is part of extermination, because it is
also the extermination of memory, of history, of the social, etc.
This forgetting is as essential as the event, in any case
unlocatable by us, inaccessible to us in its truth. This
forgetting is still too dangerous, it must be effaced by an
artificial memory (today, everywhere, it is artificial memories
that efface the memory of man, that efface man in his own
memory). This artificial memory will be the restaging of
extermination—but late, much too late for it to be able to make
real waves and profoundly disturb something, and especially,
especially through a medium that is itself cold, radiating
forgetfulness, deterrence, and extermination in a still more
systematic way, if that is possible, than the camps themselves.
One no longer makes the Jews pass through the crematorium or the
gas chamber, but through the sound track and image track, through
the universal screen and the microprocessor. Forgetting,
annihilation, finally achieves its aesthetic dimension in this
way—it is achieved in retro, finally elevated here to a mass
level.
:::

Even the type of sociohistorical dimension that still remained
forgotten in the form of guilt, of shameful latency, of the
not-said, no longer exists, because now "everyone knows,"
everybody has trembled and bawled in the face of extermination—a
sure sign that "that" will never again occur. But what one
exorcises in this way at little cost, and for the price of a few
tears, will never in effect be reproduced, because it has always
been in the midst of currently reproducing itself, and precisely
in the very form in which one pretends to denounce it, in the
medium itself of this supposed exorcism: television. Same process
of forgetting, of liquidation, of extermination, same
annihilation of memories and of history, same inverse, implosive
radiation, same absorption without an echo, same black hole as
Auschwitz. And one would like to have us believe that TV will
lift the weight of Auschwitz by making a collective awareness
radiate, whereas television is its perpetuation in another guise,
this time no longer under the auspices of a *site* of
annihilation, but of a *medium* of deterrence.

What no one wants to understand is that *Holocaust is primarily*
(and exclusively) an event, or, rather, a *televised* object
(fundamental rule of McLuhan's, which must not be forgotten),
that is to say, that one attempts to rekindle a *cold* historical
event, tragic but cold, the first major event of cold systems, of
cooling systems, of systems of deterrence and extermination that
will then be deployed in other forms (including the cold war,
etc.) and in regard to cold masses (the Jews no longer even
concerned with their own death, and the eventually self-managed
masses no longer even in revolt: deterred until death, deterred
from their very own death) to rekindle this cold event through a
cold medium, television, and for the masses who are themselves
cold, who will only have the opportunity for a tactile thrill and
a posthumous emotion, a deterrent thrill as well, which will make
them spill into forgetting with a kind of good aesthetic
conscience of the catastrophe.

In order to rekindle all that, the whole political and
pedagogical orchestration that came from every direction to
attempt to give meaning to the event (the televised event this
time) was not at all excessive. Panicked blackmailing around the
possible consequence of this broadcast on the imagination of
children and others. All the pedagogues and social workers
mobilized to filter the thing, as if there were some danger of
infection in this artificial resurrection! The danger was really
rather the opposite: from the cold to the cold, the social
inertia of cold systems, of TV in particular. It was thus
necessary that the whole world mobilize itself to remake the
social, a hot social, heated discussion, hence communication,
from the cold monster of extermination. One lacks stakes,
investment, history, speech. That is the fundamental problem. The
objective is thus to produce them at all cost, and this broadcast
served this purpose: to capture the artificial heat of a dead
event to warm the dead body of the social. Whence the addition of
the supplementary medium to expand on the effect through
feedback: immediate polls sanctioning the massive effect of the
broadcast, the collective impact of the message—whereas it is
well understood that the polls only verify the televisual success
of the medium itself. But this confusion will never be lifted.

From there, it is necessary to speak of the cold light of
television, why it is harmless to the imagination (including that
of children) because it no longer carries any imaginary and this
for the simple reason that *it is no longer an image*. By
contrast with the cinema, which is still blessed (but less and
less so because more and more contaminated by TV) with an intense
imaginary—because the cinema is an image. That is to say not only
a screen and a visual form, but a *myth*, something that still
retains something of the double, of the phantasm, of the mirror,
of the dream, etc. Nothing of any of this in the "TV" image,
which suggests nothing, which mesmerizes, which itself is nothing
but a screen, not even that: a miniaturized terminal that, in
fact, is immediately located in your head—you are the screen, and
the TV watches you—it transistorizes all the neurons and passes
through like a magnetic tape—a tape, not an image.
