# The Beaubourg Effect: Implosion and Deterrence #

:::{.initial}
The Beaubourg effect, the Beaubourg machine, the Beaubourg
*thing*—how to give it a name? Enigma of this carcass of flux and
signs, of networks and circuits—the final impulse to translate a
structure that no longer has a name, the structure of social
relations given over to superficial ventilation (animation,
self-management, information, media) and to an irreversibly deep
implosion. Monument to the games of mass simulation, the Pompidou
Center functions as an incinerator absorbing all the cultural
energy and devouring it—a bit like the black monolith in *2001*:
insane convection of all the contents that came there to be
materialized, to be absorbed, and to be annihilated.
:::

All around, the neighborhood is nothing but a protective
zone—remodeling, disinfection, a snobbish and hygienic design—but
above all in a figurative sense: it is a machine for making
emptiness. It is a bit like the real danger nuclear power
stations pose: not lack of security, pollution, explosion, but a
system of maximum security that radiates around them, the
protective zone of control and deterrence that extends, slowly
but surely, over the territory—a technical, ecological, economic,
geopolitical glacis. What does the nuclear matter? The station is
a matrix in which an absolute model of security is elaborated,
which will encompass the whole social field, and which is
fundamentally a model of deterrence (it is the same one that
controls us globally, under the sign of peaceful coexistence and
of the simulation of atomic danger).

The same model, with the same proportions, is elaborated at the
Center: cultural fission, political deterrence.

This said, the circulation of fluids is unequal. Ventilation,
cooling, electrical networks the "traditional" fluids circulate
there very well. Already the circulation of the human flux is
less assured (the archaic solution of escalators in plastic
sleeves, one ought to be aspirated, propelled, or something, but
with a mobility that would be up to this baroque theatricality of
fluids that is the source of the originality of the carcass). As
for the material of the works, of objects, of books and the
so-called polyvalent interior space, these no longer circulate at
all. It is the opposite of Roissy, where from a futurist center
of "spatial" design radiating toward "satellites," etc., one ends
up completely flat in front of …traditional airplanes. But the
incoherence is the same. (What happened to money, this other
fluid, what happened to its mode of circulation, of emulsion, of
fallout at Beaubourg?)

Same contradiction even in the behavior of the personnel,
assigned to the "polyvalent" space and without a private work
space. On their feet and mobile, the people affect a cool
demeanor, more supple, very contemporary, adapted to the
"structure" of a "modern" space. Seated in their corner, which is
precisely not one, they exhaust themselves secreting an
artificial solitude, remaking their "bubble." Therein is also a
great tactic of deterrence: one condemns them to using all their
energy in this individual defense. Curiously, one thus finds the
same contradiction that characterizes the Beaubourg thing: a
mobile exterior, commuting, cool and modern—an interior shriveled
by the same old values.

This space of deterrence, articulated on the ideology of
visibility, of transparency, of polyvalency, of consensus and
contact, and sanctioned by the blackmail to security, is today,
virtually, that of all social relations. All of social discourse
is there, and on this level as well as on that of the treatment
of culture, Beaubourg flagrantly contradicts its explicit
objectives, a nice monument to our modernity. It is nice to think
that the idea did not come to some revolutionary spirit, but to
the logicians of the established order, deprived of all critical
intelligence, and thus closer to the truth, capable, in their
obstinacy, of putting in place a machine that is fundamentally
uncontrollable, that in its very success escapes them, and that
is the most exact reflection, even in its contradictions, of the
current state of things.

Certainly, all the cultural contents of Beaubourg are
anachronistic, because only an empty interior could correspond to
this architectural envelope. The general impression being that
everything here has come out of a coma, that everything wants to
be animation and is only reanimation, and that this is good
because culture is dead, a condition that Beaubourg admirably
retraces, but in a dishonest fashion, whereas one should have
triumphantly accepted this death and erected a monument or an
anti-monument equivalent to the phallic inanity of the Eiffel
Tower in its time. Monument to total disconnection, to
hyperreality and to the implosion of culture-achieved today for
us in the effect of transistorized circuits always threatened by
a gigantic short circuit.

Beaubourg is already an imperial compression—figure of a culture
already crushed by its own weight—like moving automobiles
suddenly frozen in a geometric solid. Like the cars of Caesar,
survivors of an ideal accident, no longer external, but internal
to the metallic and mechanical structure, and which would have
produced tons of cubic scrap iron, where the chaos of tubes,
levers, frames, of metal and human flesh inside is tailored to
the geometric size of the smallest possible space—thus the
culture of Beaubourg is ground, twisted, cut up, and pressed into
its smallest simple elements—a bundle of defunct transmissions
and metabolisms, frozen like a science-fiction mecanoid.

But instead of breaking and compressing all culture here in this
carcass that in any case has the appearance of a compression,
instead of that, one *exhibits* Caesar there. One exhibits
Dubuffet and the counterculture, whose inverse simulation acts as
a referential for the defunct culture. In this carcass that could
have served as a mausoleum to the useless operationality of
signs, one reexhibits Tinguely's ephemeral and autodestructive
machines under the sign of the eternity of culture. Thus one
neutralizes everything together: Tinguely is embalmed in the
museal institution, Beaubourg falls back on its supposed artistic
contents.

Fortunately, this whole simulacrum of cultural values is
annihilated in advance by the external architecture.^[Still
something else annihilates the cultural project of Beaubourg: the
masses themselves also flood in to take pleasure in it (we will
return to this later).] Because this architecture, with its
networks of tubes and the look it has of being an expo or world's
fair building, with its (calculated?) fragility deterring any
traditional mentality or monumentality, overtly proclaims that
our time will never again be that of duration, that our only
temporality is that of the accelerated cycle and of recycling,
that of the circuit and of the transit of fluids. Our only
culture in the end is that of hydrocarbons, that of refining,
cracking, breaking cultural molecules and of their recombination
into synthesized products. This, the Beaubourg Museum wishes to
conceal, but the Beaubourg cadaver proclaims. And this is what
underlies the beauty of the cadaver and the failure of the
interior spaces. In any case, the very ideology of "cultural
production" is antithetical to all culture, as is that of
visibility and of the polyvalent space: culture is a site of the
secret, of seduction, of initiation, of a restrained and highly
ritualized symbolic exchange. Nothing can be done about it. Too
bad for the masses, too bad for Beaubourg.

What should, then, have been placed in Beaubourg?

Nothing. The void that would have signified the disappearance of
any culture of meaning and aesthetic sentiment. But this is still
too romantic and destructive, this void would still have had
value as a masterpiece of anticulture.

Perhaps revolving strobe lights and gyroscopic lights, striating
the space, for which the crowd would have provided the moving
base element?

In fact, Beaubourg illustrates very well that an order of
simulacra only establishes itself on the alibi of the previous
order. Here, a cadaver all in flux and surface connections gives
itself as content a traditional culture of depth. An order of
prior simulacra (that of meaning) furnishes the empty substance
of a subsequent order, which, itself, no longer even knows the
distinction between signifier and signified, nor between form and
content.

The question: "What should have been placed in Beaubourg?" is
thus absurd. It cannot be answered because the topical
distinction between interior and exterior should no longer be
posed. There lies our truth, the truth of Möbius-doubtless an
unrealizable utopia, but which Beaubourg still points to as
right, to the degree to which any of its contents is a
*countermeaning* and annihilated in advance by the form.

Yet-yet … if you had to have something in Beaubourg—it should
have been a labyrinth, a combinatory, infinite library, an
aleatory redistribution of destinies through games or
lotteries—in short, the universe of Borges—or even the circular
Ruins: the slowed-down enchainment of individuals dreamed up by
each other (not a dreamworld Disneyland, a laboratory of
practical fiction). An experimentation with all the different
processes of representation: defraction, implosion, slow motion,
aleatory linkage and decoupling—a bit like at the Exploratorium
in San Francisco or in the novels of Philip K. Dick—in short a
culture of simulation and of fascination, and not always one of
production and meaning: this is what might be proposed that would
not be a miserable anticulture. Is it possible? Not here,
evidently. But this culture takes place elsewhere, everywhere,
nowhere. From today, the only real cultural practice, that of the
masses, ours (there is no longer a difference), is a
manipulative, aleatory practice, a labyrinthine practice of
signs, and one that no longer has any meaning.

In another way, however, it is not true that there is no
coherence between form and content at Beaubourg. It is true if
one gives any credence to the official cultural project. But
exactly the opposite occurs there. Beaubourg is nothing but a
huge effort to transmute this famous traditional culture of
meaning into the aleatory order of signs, into an order of
simulacra (the third) that is completely homogeneous with the
flux and pipes of the facade. And it is in order to prepare the
masses for this new semiurgic order that one brings them together
here—with the opposite pretext of acculturating them to meaning
and depth.

One must thus start with this axiom: Beaubourg is a *monument of
cultural deterrence*. Within a museal scenario that only serves
to keep up the humanist fiction of culture, it is a veritable
fashioning of the death of culture that takes place, and it is a
veritable *cultural mourning* for which the masses are joyously
gathered.

And they throw themselves at it. There lies the supreme irony of
Beaubourg: the masses throw themselves at it not because they
salivate for that culture which they have been denied for
centuries, but because they have for the first time the
opportunity to massively participate in this great mourning of a
culture that, in the end, they have always detested.

The misunderstanding is therefore complete when one denounces
Beaubourg as a cultural mystification of the masses. The masses,
themselves, rush there to enjoy this execution, this
dismemberment, this operational prostitution of a culture finally
truly liquidated, including all counterculture that is nothing
but its apotheosis. The masses rush toward Beaubourg as they rush
toward disaster sites, with the same irresistible elan. Better:
they are the disaster of Beaubourg. Their number, their stampede,
their fascination, their itch to see everything is objectively a
deadly and catastrophic behavior for the whole undertaking. Not
only does their weight put the building in danger, but their
adhesion, their curiosity annihilates the very contents of this
culture of animation. This rush can no longer be measured against
what was proposed as the cultural objective, it is its radical
negation, in both its excess and success. It is thus the masses
who assume the role of catastrophic agent in this structure of
catastrophe, it is *the masses themselves who put an end to mass
culture*.

Circulating in the space of transparency, the masses are
certainly converted into flux, but at the same time, through
their opacity and inertia, they put an end to this "polyvalent"
space. One invites the masses to participate, to simulate, to
play with the models—they go one better: they participate and
manipulate so well that they efface all the meaning one wants to
give to the operation and put the very infrastructure of the
edifice in danger. Thus, always a sort of parody, a
hypersimulation in response to cultural simulation, transforms
the masses, who should only be the livestock of culture, into the
agents of the execution of this culture, of which Beaubourg was
only the shameful incarnation.

One must applaud this success of cultural deterrence. All the
antiartists, leftists, and those who hold culture in contempt
have never even gotten close to approaching the dissuassive
efficacy of this monumental black hole that is Beaubourg. It is a
truly revolutionary operation, precisely because it is
involuntary, insane and uncontrolled, whereas any operation meant
to put an end to culture only serves, as one knows, to resurrect
it.

To tell the truth, the only content of Beaubourg is the masses
themselves, whom the building treats like a converter, like a
black box, or, in terms of input-output, just like a refinery
handles petroleum products or a flood of unprocessed material.

It has never been so clear that the content—here, culture,
elsewhere, information or commodities—is nothing but the phantom
support for the operation of the medium itself, whose function is
always to induce mass, to produce a homogeneous human and mental
flux. An immense to-and-fro movement similar to that of suburban
commuters, absorbed and ejected at fixed times by their
workplace. And it is precisely work that is at issue here—a work
of testing, polling, and directed interrogation: the people come
here to select objects—responses to all the questions they might
ask themselves, or rather *they come themselves in response to*
the functional and directed question that the objects constitute.
More than a chain of work it is thus a question of a programmatic
discipline whose constraints have been effaced behind a veneer of
tolerance. Well beyond traditional institutions of capital, the
hypermarket, or the Beaubourg "hypermarket of culture," is
already the model of all future forms of controlled
socialization: retotalization in a homogeneous space-time of all
the dispersed functions of the body and of social life (work,
leisure, media culture), retranscription of all the contradictory
currents in terms of integrated circuits. Space-time of a whole
operational simulation of social life.

For that, the mass of consumers must be equivalent or homologous
to the mass of products. It is the confrontation and the fusion
of these two masses that occurs in the hypermarket as it does at
Beaubourg, and that makes of them something very different from
the traditional sites of culture (monuments, museums, galleries,
libraries, community arts centers, etc.). Here a critical mass
beyond which the commodity becomes hypercommodity and culture
hyperculture, is elaborated—that is to say no longer linked to
distinct exchanges or determined needs, but to a kind of total
descriptive universe, or integrated circuit that implosion
traverses through and through—incessant circulation of choices,
readings, references, marks, decoding. Here cultural objects, as
elsewhere the objects of consumption, have no other end than to
maintain you in a state of mass integration, of transistorized
flux, of a magnetized molecule. It is what one comes to learn in
a hypermarket: hyperreality of the commodity—it is what one comes
to learn at Beaubourg: the hyperreality of culture.

Already with the traditional museum this cutting up, this
regrouping, this interference of all cultures, this unconditional
aestheticization that constitutes the hyperreality of culture
begins, but the museum is still a memory. Never, as it did here,
has culture lost its memory in the service of stockpiling and
functional redistribution. And this translates a more general
fact: that throughout the "civilized" world the construction of
stockpiles of objects has brought with it the complementary
process of stockpiles of people—the line, waiting, traffic jams,
concentration, the camp. That is "mass production," not in the
sense of a massive production or for use by the masses, but the
production of the masses. The masses as the final product of all
sociality, and, at the same time, as putting an end to sociality,
because these masses that one wants us to believe are the social,
are on the contrary the site of the implosion of the social. *The
masses are the increasingly dense sphere in which the whole
social comes to be imploded, and to be devoured in an
uninterrupted process of simulation*.

Whence this concave mirror: it is from seeing the masses in the
interior that the masses will be tempted to rush in. Typical
marketing method: the whole ideology of transparency here takes
on its meaning. Or again: it is in staging a reduced ideal model
that one hopes for an accelerated gravitation, an automatic
agglutination of culture as an automatic agglomeration of the
masses. Same process: nuclear operation of a chain reaction, or
specular operation of white magic.

Thus for the first time, Beaubourg is at the level of culture
what the hypermarket is at the level of the commodity: *the
perfect circulatory operator*, the demonstration of anything
(commodity, culture, crowd, compressed air) *through its own
accelerated circulation*.

But if the supply of objects brings along with it the stockpiling
of men, the latent violence in the supply of objects brings with
it the inverse violence of men.

Every stock is violent, and there is a specific violence in any
mass of men also, because of the fact that it implodes—a violence
proper to its gravitation, to its densification around its own
locus of inertia. The masses are a locus of inertia and through
that a locus of a completely new, inexplicable violence different
from explosive violence.

*Critical mass*, implosive mass. Beyond thirty thousand it poses
the risk of "bending" the structure of Beaubourg. If the masses
magnetized by the structure become a destructive variable of the
structure itself—if those who conceived of the project wanted
this (but how to hope for this?), if they thus programmed the
chance of putting an end with one blow to both architecture and
culture—then Beaubourg constitutes the most audacious object and
the most successful happening of the century!

*Make Beaubourg bend!* New motto of a revolutionary order.
Useless to set fire to it, useless to contest it. Do it! It is
the best way of destroying it. The success of Beaubourg is no
longer a mystery: the people go there *for that*, they throw
themselves on this building, whose fragility already breathes
catastrophe, with the single goal of making it bend.

Certainly they obey the imperative of deterrence: one gives them
an object to consume, a culture to devour, an edifice to
manipulate. But at the same time they expressly aim, and without
knowing it, at this annihilation. The onslaught is the only act
the masses can produce as such—a projectile mass that challenges
the edifice of mass culture, that wittly replies with its weight
(that is to say with the characteristic most deprived of meaning,
the stupidest, the least cultural one they possess) to the
challenge of culturality thrown at it by Beaubourg. To the
challenge of mass acculturation to a sterilized culture, the
masses respond with a destructive irruption, which is prolonged
in a brutal manipulation. To mental deterrence the masses respond
with a direct physical deterrence. It is their own challenge.
Their ruse, which is to respond in the very terms by which they
are solicited, but beyond that, to respond to the simulation in
which one imprisons them with an enthusiastic social process that
surpasses the objectives of the former and acts as a destructive
hypersimulation.^[In relation to this critical mass, and to its
radical understanding of Beaubourg, how derisory seems the
demonstration of the students from Vincennes the evening of its
inauguration!]

People have the desire to take everything, to pillage everything,
to swallow everything, to manipulate everything. Seeing,
deciphering, learning does not touch them. The only massive
affect is that of manipulation. The organizers (and the artists
and intellectuals) are frightened by this uncontrollable
watchfulness, because they never count on anything but the
apprenticeship of the masses to the *spectacle* of culture. They
never count on this active, destructive fascination, a brutal and
original response to the gift of an incomprehensible culture, an
attraction that has all the characteristics of breaking and
entering and of the violation of a sanctuary.

Beaubourg could have or should have disappeared the day after the
inauguration, dismantled and kidnapped by the crowd, which would
have been the only possible response to the absurd challenge of
the transparency and democracy of culture—each person taking away
a fetishized bolt of this culture itself fetishized.

The people come to *touch*, they look as if they were touching,
their gaze is only an aspect of tactile manipulation. It is
certainly a question of a tactile universe, no longer a visual or
discursive one, and the people are directly implicated in a
process: to manipulate/to be manipulated, to ventilate/to be
ventilated, to circulate/to make circulate, which is no longer of
the order of representation, nor of distance, nor of reflection.
It is something that is part of panic, and of a world in panic.

Panic in slow motion, no external variable. It is the violence
internal to a saturated ensemble. *Implosion*.

Beaubourg cannot even burn, everything is foreseen. Fire,
explosion, destruction are no longer the imaginary alternative to
this type of building. It is implosion that is the form of
abolishing the "quaternary" world, both cybernetic and
combinatory.

Subversion, violent destruction is what corresponds to a mode of
production. To a universe of networks, of combinatory theory, and
of flow correspond reversal and implosion.

The same for institutions, the state, power, etc. The dream of
seeing all that explode by dint of contradictions is precisely
nothing but a dream. What is produced in reality is that the
institutions implode of themselves, by dint of ramifications,
feedback, overdeveloped control circuits. *Power implodes*, this
is its current mode of disappearance.

Such is the case for the city. Fires, war, plague, revolutions,
criminal marginality, catastrophes: the whole problematic of the
anticity, of the negativity internal or external to the city, has
some archaic relation to its true mode of annihilation.

Even the scenario of the underground city—the Chinese version of
the burial of structures—is naive. The city does not repeat
itself any longer according to a schema of *reproduction* still
dependent on the general schema of production, or according to a
schema of resemblance still dependent on a schema of
representation. (That is how one still restored after the Second
World War.) The city no longer revives, even deep down it is
remade starting from a sort of genetic code that makes it
possible to repeat it indefinitely starting with an accumulated
cybernetic memory. Gone even the Borgesian utopia, of the map
coextensive with the territory and doubling it in its entirety:
today the simulacrum no longer goes by way of the double and of
duplication, but by way of genetic miniaturization. End of
representation and implosion, there also, of the whole space in
an infinitesimal memory, which forgets nothing, and which belongs
to no one. Simulation of an immanent, increasingly dense,
irreversible order, one that is potentially saturated and that
will never again witness the liberating explosion.

We *were* a culture of liberating violence (rationality). Whether
it be that of capital, of the liberation of productive forces, of
the irreversible extension of the field of reason and of the
field of value, of the conquered and colonized space including
the universal—whether it be that of the revolution, which
anticipates the future forms of the social and of the energy of
the social—the schema is the same: that of an expanding sphere,
whether through slow or violent phases, that of a liberated
energy—the imaginary of radiation.

The violence that accompanies it is that of a wider world: it is
that of production. This violence is dialectical, energetic,
cathartic. It is the one we have learned to analyze and that is
familiar to us: that which traces the paths of the social and
which leads to the saturation of the whole field of the social.
It is a violence that is *determined*, analytical, liberating.

A whole other violence appears today, which we no longer know how
to analyze, because it escapes the traditional schema of
explosive violence: *implosive* violence that no longer results
from the extension of a system, but from its saturation and its
retraction, as is the case for physical stellar systems. A
violence that follows an inordinate densification of the social,
the state of an overregulated system, a network (of knowledge,
information, power) that is overencumbered, and of a hypertrophic
control investing all the interstitial pathways.

This violence is unintelligible to us because our whole imaginary
has as its axis the logic of expanding systems. It is
indecipherable because undetermined. Perhaps it no longer even
comes from the schema of indeterminacy. Because the aleatory
models that have taken over from classical models of
determination and causality are not fundamentally different. They
translate the passage of defined systems of expansion to systems
of production and expansion on all levels—in a star or in a
rhizome, it doesn't matter—all the philosophies of the release of
energy, of the irradiation of intensities and of the
molecularization of desire go in the same direction, that of a
saturation as far as the interstitial and the infinity of
networks. The difference from the molar to the molecular is only
a modulation, the last perhaps, in the fundamental energetic
process of expanding systems.

Something else if we move from a millennial phase of the
liberation and disconnection of energies to a phase of implosion,
after a kind of maximum radiation (see Bataille's concepts of
loss and expenditure in this sense, and the solar myth of an
inexhaustible radiation, on which he founds his sumptuary
anthropology: it is the last explosive and radiating myth of our
philosophy, the last fire of artifice of a fundamentally general
economy, but this no longer has any meaning for us), to a phase
of the *reversion of the social*—gigantic reversion of a field
once the point of saturation is reached. The stellar systems also
do not cease to exist once their radiating energy is dissipated:
they implode according to a process that is at first slow, and
then progressively accelerates—they contract at a fabulous speed,
and become involutive systems, which absorb all the surrounding
energies, so that they become black holes where the world as we
know it, as radiation and indefinite energy potential, is
abolished.

Perhaps the great metropolises—certainly these if this hypothesis
has any meaning—have become sites of implosion in this sense,
sites of the absorption and reabsorption of the social itself
whose golden age, contemporaneous with the double concept of
capital and revolution, is doubtless past. The social involutes
slowly or brutally, in a field of inertia, which already envelops
the political. (The opposite energy?) One must stop oneself from
taking implosion for a negative process -inert, regressive—like
the one language imposes on us by exalting the opposite terms of
evolution, of revolution. Implosion is a process specific to
incalculable consequences. May 1968 was without a doubt the first
implosive episode, that is to say contrary to its rewriting in
terms of revolutionary prosopopeia, a first violent reaction to
the saturation of the social, a retraction, a challenge to the
hegemony of the social, in contradiction, moreover, to the
ideology of the participants themselves, who thought they were
going further into the social—such is the imaginary that still
dominates us—and moreover a good part of the events of 1968 were
still able to come from that revolutionary dynamic and explosive
violence, but something else began at the same time there: the
violent involution of the social, determined on that score, and
the consecutive and sudden implosion of power, in a brief moment
of time, but that never stopped afterward—fundamentally it is
that which continues, the implosion, of the social, of
institutions, of power—and not at all an unlocatable
revolutionary dynamic. On the contrary, revolution itself, the
idea of revolution also implodes, and this implosion carries
weightier consequences than the revolution itself.

Certainly, since 1968, and thanks to 1968, the social, like the
desert, grows-participation, management, generalized
self-management, etc.—but at the same time it comes close in
multiple places, more numerous than in 1968, to its disaffection
and to its total reversion. Slow seism, intelligible to
historical reason.
