# Clone Story #

:::{.initial}
Of all the prostheses that mark the history of the body, the
double is doubtless the oldest. But the double is precisely not a
prosthesis: it is an imaginary figure, which, just like the soul,
the shadow, the mirror image, haunts the subject like his other,
which makes it so that the subject is simultaneously itself and
never resembles itself again, which haunts the subject like a
subtle and always averted death. This is not always the case,
however: when the double materializes, when it becomes visible,
it signifies imminent death.
:::

In other words, the imaginary power and wealth of the double—the
one in which the strangeness and at the same time the intimacy of
the subject to itself are played out
(*heimlich/unheimlich*)—rests on its immateriality, on the fact
that it is and remains a phantasm. Everyone can dream, and must
have dreamed his whole life, of a perfect duplication or
multiplication of his being, but such copies only have the power
of dreams, and are destroyed when one attempts to force the dream
into the real. The same is true of the (primal) scene of
seduction: it only functions when it is phantasmed, reremembered,
never real. It belonged to our era to wish to exorcise this
phantasm like the others, that is to say to want to realize,
materialize it in flesh and bone and, in a completely contrary
way, to change the game of the double from a subtle exchange of
death with the Other into the eternity of the Same.

Clones. Cloning. Human cuttings ad infinitum, each individual
cell of an organism capable of again becoming the matrix of an
identical individual. In the United States, a child was born a
few months ago like a geranium: from cuttings. The first clone
child (the lineage of an individual via vegetal multiplication).
The first born from a single cell of a single individual, his
"father," the sole progenitor, of which he would be the exact
replica, the perfect twin, the double.^[Cf. D. Rorvik, *A son
image: La copie d'un homme* (In his image: The copy of a man)
(Paris: Grasset, 1978).]

Dream of an eternal twining substituted for sexual procreation
that is linked to death. Cellular dream of scissiparity, the
purest form of parentage, because it finally allows one to do
without the other, to go from the same to the same (one still has
to use the uterus of a woman, and a pitted ovum, but this support
is ephemeral, and in any case anonymous: a female prosthesis
could replace it). Monocellular utopia which, by way of genetics,
allows complex beings to achieve the destiny of protozoas.

What, if not a death drive, would push sexed beings to regress to
a form of reproduction prior to sexuation (besides, isn't it this
form of scissiparity, this reproduction and proliferation through
pure contiguity that is for us, in the depths of our imaginary,
death and the death drive—what denies sexuality and wants to
annihilate it, sexuality being the carrier of life, that is to
say of a critical and mortal form of reproduction?) and that, at
the same time, would push them metaphysically to deny all
alterity, all alteration of the Same in order to aim solely for
the perpetuation of an identity, a transparency of the genetic
inscription no longer even subject to the vicissitudes of
procreation?

Let's leave the death drive aside. Is it a question of the
phantasm of auto-genesis? No, because such a fantasy still passes
through the figures of the mother and the father, *sexed*
parental figures that the subject can dream of effacing by
substituting himself for them, but without denying the symbolic
structure of procreation at all: becoming one's own child is
still being someone's child. Whereas cloning radically abolishes
the Mother, but also the Father, the intertwining of their genes,
the imbrication of their differences, but above all the *joint*
act that is procreation. The cloner does not beget himself: he
sprouts from each of his segments. One can speculate on the
wealth of each of these vegetal branchings that in effect resolve
all oedipal sexuality in the service of "nonhuman" sex, of sex
through immediate contiguity and reduction—it is still the case
that it is no longer a question of the fantasy of auto-genesis.
The Father and the Mother have disappeared, not in the service of
an aleatory liberty of the subject, but in the service of a
*matrix called code*. No more mother, no more father: a matrix.
And it is the matrix, that of the genetic code, that now
infinitely "gives birth" based on a functional mode purged of all
aleatory sexuality.

The subject is also gone, since identical duplication puts an end
to his division. The mirror stage is abolished in cloning, or
rather it is parodied therein in a monstrous fashion. Cloning
also retains nothing, and for the same reason, of the immemorial
and narcissistic dream of the subject's projection into his ideal
alter ego, since this projection still passes through an image:
the one in the mirror, in which the subject is alienated in order
to find himself again, or the one, seductive and mortal, in which
the subject sees himself in order to die there. None of this
occurs in cloning. No more medium, no more image—any more than an
industrial object is the mirror of the identical one that
succeeds it in the series. One is never the ideal or mortal
mirage of the other, they can only be added to each other, and if
they can only be added, it means that they are not sexually
engendered and know nothing of death.

It is no longer even a question of being twins, since Gemini or
Twins possess a specific property, a particular and sacred
fascination of the Two, of what is two together, and never was
one. Whereas cloning enshrines the reiteration of the same: Ⅰ +
Ⅰ + Ⅰ + Ⅰ, etc.

Neither child, nor twin, nor narcissistic reflection, the clone
is the materialization of the double by genetic means, that is to
say the abolition of all alterity and of any imaginary. Which is
combined with the economy of sexuality. Delirious apotheosis of a
productive technology.

A segment has no need of imaginary mediation in order to
reproduce itself, any more than the earthworm needs earth: each
segment of the worm is directly reproduced as a whole worm, just
as each cell of the American CEO can produce a new CEO. Just as
each fragment of a hologram can again become the matrix of the
complete hologram: the information remains whole, with perhaps
somewhat less definition, in each of the dispersed fragments of
the hologram.

This is how one puts an end to totality. If all information can
be found in each of its parts, the whole loses its meaning. It is
also the end of the body, of this singularity called body, whose
secret is precisely that it cannot be segmented into additional
cells, that it is an indivisible configuration, to which its
sexuation is witness (paradox: cloning will fabricate sexed
beings in perpetuity, since they are similar to their model,
whereas thereby sex becomes useless—but precisely sex is not a
function, it is what makes a body a body, it is what exceeds all
the parts, all the diverse functions of this body). Sex (or
death: in this sense it is the same thing) is what exceeds all
information that can be collected on a body. Well, where is all
this information collected? In the genetic formula. This is why
it must necessarily want to forge a path of autonomous
reproduction, independent of sexuality and of death.

Already, biophysioanatomical science, by dissecting the body into
organs and functions, begins the process of the analytic
decomposition of the body, and micromolecular genetics is nothing
but the logical consequence, though at a much higher level of
abstraction and simulation—at the nuclear level of the command
cell, at the direct level of the genetic code, around which this
whole phantasmagoria is organized.

From a functional and mechanistic point of view, each organ is
still only a partial and differentiated prosthesis: already
simulation, but "traditional." From the point of view of
cybernetics and computer science, it is the smallest
undifferentiated element, each cell of a body becomes an
"embryonic" prosthesis of this body. It is the genetic formula
inscribed in each cell that becomes the veritable modern
prosthesis of all bodies. If the prosthesis is commonly an
artifact that supplements a failing organ, or the instrumental
extension of a body, then the DNA molecule, which contains all
information relative to a body, is the prosthesis par excellence,
the one that will allow for the *indefinite extension of this
body by the body itself*—this body itself being nothing but the
indefinite series of its prostheses.

A cybernetic prosthesis infinitely more subtle and still more
artificial than any mechanical prosthesis. Because the genetic
code is not "natural": just as every abstract and autonomized
part of a whole becomes an artificial prosthesis that alters this
whole by substituting itself for it (pro-thesis: this is the
etymological meaning), one can say that the genetic code, where
the whole of a being is supposedly condensed because all the
"information" of this being would be imprisoned there (there lies
the incredible violence of genetic simulation) is an artifact, an
operational prosthesis, an abstract matrix, from which will be
able to emerge, no longer even through reproduction, but through
pure and simple renewal, identical beings assigned to the same
controls.

>:::{.noindent}
>My genetic patrimony was fixed once and for all when a certain
>spermatozoa encountered a certain ovum. This heritage contains
>the recipe for all the biochemical processes that realized me
>and ensure my functioning. A copy of this recipe is inscribed in
>each of the dozens of millions of cells that constitute me
>today. Each of these cells knows how to manufacture me; before
>being a cell of my liver or of my blood, it is a cell of me. It
>is thus theoretically possible to manufacture an individual
>identical to me starting with one of these cells. (Professor A.
>Jacquard)
>:::

Cloning is thus the last stage of the history and modeling of the
body, the one at which, reduced to its abstract and genetic
formula, the individual is destined to serial propagation. It is
necessary to revisit what Walter Benjamin said of the work of art
in the age of its mechanical reproducibility. What is lost in the
work that is serially reproduced, is its *aura*, its singular
quality of the here and now, its aesthetic form (it had already
lost its ritual form, in its aesthetic quality), and, according
to Benjamin, it takes on, in its ineluctable destiny of
reproduction, a *political* form. What is lost is the original,
which only a history itself nostalgic and retrospective can
reconstitute as "authentic." The most advanced, the most modern
form of this development, which Benjamin described in cinema,
photography, and contemporary mass media, is one in which the
original no longer even exists, since things are conceived from
the beginning as a function of their unlimited reproduction.

This is what happens to us with cloning, no longer only at the
level of messages, but at the level of individuals. In fact this
is what happens to the body when it ceases to be conceived as
anything but a message, as a stockpile of information and of
messages, as fodder for data processing. Thus nothing is opposed
to the body being serially reproduced in the same way Benjamin
describes the reproduction of industrial objects and the images
of the mass media. There is a precession of reproduction over
production, a precession of the genetic model over all possible
bodies. It is the irruption of technology that controls this
reversal, of a technology that Benjamin was already describing,
in its total consequences, as a total medium, but one still of
the industrial age—a gigantic prosthesis that controlled the
generation of objects and identical images, in which *nothing*
could be differentiated any longer from anything else—but still
without imagining the current sophistication of this technology,
which renders the generation of identical *beings* possible,
though there is no possibility of a return to an original being.
The prostheses of the industrial age are still external,
*exotechnical*, those that we know have been subdivided and
internalized: *esotechnical*. We are in the age of soft
technologies—genetic and mental software.

As long as the prostheses of the old industrial golden age were
mechanical, they still returned to the body in order to modify
its image—conversely, they themselves were metabolized in the
imaginary and this technological metabolism was also part of the
image of the body. But when one reaches a point of no return
(deadend) in simulation, that is to say when the prosthesis goes
deeper, is interiorized in, infiltrates the anonymous and
micro-molecular heart of the body, as soon as it is imposed on
the body itself as the "original" model, burning all the previous
symbolic circuits, the only possible body the immutable
repetition of the prosthesis, then it is the end of the body, of
its history, and of its vicissitudes. The individual is no longer
anything but a cancerous metastasis of its base formula. All the
individuals produced through cloning individual X, are they
anything other than a cancerous metastasis—the proliferation of
the same cell such as occurs with cancer? There is a narrow
relation between the key concept of the genetic code and the
pathology of cancer: the code designates the smallest simple
element, the minimal formula to which an entire individual can be
reduced, and in such a way that he can only reproduce himself
identically to himself. Cancer designates a proliferation ad
infinitum of a base cell without taking into consideration the
organic laws of the whole. It is the same thing with cloning:
nothing opposes itself any longer to the renewal of the Same, to
the unchecked proliferation of a single matrix. Formerly, sexed
reproduction still stood in opposition to this, today one can
finally isolate the genetic matrix of identity, and one will be
able to eliminate all the differential vicissitudes that once
constituted the aleatory charm of individuals.

If all cells are conceived primarily as a receptacle of the same
genetic formula—not only all the identical individuals, but all
the cells of the same individual—what are they but the cancerous
extension of this base formula? The metastasis that began with
industrial objects ends with cellular organization. It is useless
to ask oneself if cancer is an illness of the capitalist age. It
is in effect the illness that controls all contemporary
pathology, because it is the very form of the virulence of the
code: an exacerbated redundancy of the same signals, an
exacerbated redundancy of the same cells.

The stage of the body changes in the course of an irreversible
technological "progression": from tanning in the sun, which
already corresponds to an artificial use of the natural medium,
that is to say to making it a prosthesis of the body (itself
becoming a simulated body, but where lies the truth of the
body?)—to domestic tanning with an iodine lamp (yet another good
old mechanical technique)—to tanning with pills and hormones
(chemical and ingested prosthesis)—and finally to tanning by
intervening in the genetic formula (an incomparably more advanced
stage, but a prosthesis nonetheless, that is, it is simply
definitively integrated, it no longer even passes through either
the surface or the orifices of the body), one passes by different
bodies. It is the schema of the whole that is metamorphosed. The
traditional prosthesis, which serves to repair a failing organ,
changes nothing in the general model of the body. Organ
transplants are still of this order. But what should be said of
mental modeling via psychotropic agents and drugs? It is the
*stage of the body* that is changed by them. The psychotropic
body is a body modeled "from the inside," no longer passing
through the perspectival space of representation, of the mirror,
and of discourse. A silent, mental, already molecular (and no
longer specular) body, a body metabolized directly, without the
mediation of the act or the gaze, an immanent body, without
alterity without a mise en scène, without transcendence, a body
consecrated to the implosive metabolism of cerebral, endocrinal
flows, a sensory, but not sensible, body because it is connected
only to its internal terminals, and not to objects of perception
(the reason why one can enclose it in a "white," blank
sensoriality—disconnecting it from its *own* sensorial
extremities, without touching the world that surrounds it,
suffices), a body already homogeneous, at this stage of plastic
tactility, of mental malleability, of psychotropism at every
level, already close to nuclear and genetic manipulation, that is
to say to the absolute loss of the image, bodies that cannot be
represented, either to others or to themselves, bodies enucleated
of their being and of their meaning by being transfigured into a
genetic formula or through biochemical instability: point of no
return, apotheosis of a technology that has itself become
interstitial and molecular.

## Notes ##

One must take into account that cancerous proliferation is also a
silent disobedience of the injunctions of the genetic code.
Cancer, if it fits with the logic of a nuclear/computer science
vision of human beings, is also its monstrous excrescence and
negation, because it leads to total disinformation and to
disaggregation. "Revolutionary" pathology of organic abandonment,
Richard Pinhas would say, in *Fictions* ("Notes synoptiques à
propos d'un mal mystérieux" [Synoptic notes on a mysterious
illness]). Entropic delirium of organisms, resisting the
negentropy of informational systems. (It is the same conjunction
as that of the masses vis-à-vis structured social formations: the
masses are also cancerous metastases outside any social
organicity.)

The same ambiguity is operative in cloning: it is at once the
triumph of a controlling hypothesis, that of the code and of
genetic information, and an eccentric distortion that destroys
its coherence. Besides, it is probable (but this is left to a
future story) that even the "clonic twin" will never be identical
to its progenitor, will never be the same, if only because it
will have had another before it. It will never be "just like what
the genetic code in itself would have changed it to." Millions of
interferences will make of it, despite everything, a different
being, who will have the very same blue eyes of its father, which
is not new. And the cloning experiment will at least have the
advantage of demonstrating the radical impossibility of mastering
a process simply by mastering information and the
code.  
Note: A version of this essay with a different ending appeared
under the title "The Hell of the Same" in Baudrillard's *The
Transparency of Evil: Essays on Extreme Phenomena*, trans. James
Benedict (London and New York: Verso, 1993).—[Trans]{.smallcaps}.
