# Holograms #

:::{.initial}
It is the fantasy of seizing reality live that continues—ever
since Narcissus bent over his spring. Surprising the real in
order to immobilize it, suspending the real in the expiration of
its double. You bend over the hologram like God over his
creature: only God has this power of passing through walls,
through people, and finding Himself immaterially in the beyond.
We dream of passing through ourselves and of finding ourselves in
the beyond: the day when your holographic double will be there in
space, eventually moving and talking, you will have realized this
miracle. Of course, it will no longer be a dream, so its charm
will be lost.
:::

The TV studio transforms you into holographic characters: one has
the impression of being materialized in space by the light of
projectors, like translucid characters who pass through the
masses (that of millions of TV viewers) exactly as your real hand
passes through the unreal hologram without encountering any
resistance—but not without consequences: having passed through
the hologram has rendered your hand unreal as well.

The hallucination is total and truly fascinating once the
hologram is projected in front of the plaque, so that nothing
separates you from it (or else the effect remains photo- or
cinematographic). This is also characteristic of trompe l'oeil,
in contrast to painting: instead of a field as a vanishing point
for the eye, you are in a reversed depth, which transforms you
into a vanishing point … The relief must leap out at you just as
a tram car and a chess game would. This said, which type of
objects or forms will be "hologenic" remains to be discovered
since the hologram is no more destined to produce
three-dimensional cinema than cinema was destined to reproduce
theater, or photography was to take up the contents of painting.

In the hologram, it is the imaginary aura of the double that is
mercilessly tracked, just as it is in the history of clones.
Similitude is a dream and must remain one, in order for a modicum
of illusion and a stage of the imaginary to exist. One must never
pass over to the side of the real, the side of the exact
resemblance of the world to itself, of the subject to itself.
Because then the image disappears. One must never pass over to
the side of the double, because then the dual relation
disappears, and with it all seduction. Well, with the hologram,
as with the clone, it is the opposite temptation, and the
opposite fascination, of the end of illusion, the stage, the
secret through the materialized projection of all available
information on the subject, through materialized transparency.

After the fantasy of seeing oneself (the mirror, the photograph)
comes that of being able to circle around oneself, finally and
especially of traversing oneself, of passing through one's own
spectral body—and any holographed object is initially the
luminous ectoplasm of your own body. But this is in some sense
the end of the aesthetic and the triumph of the medium, exactly
as in stereophonia, which, at its most sophisticated limits,
neatly puts an end to the charm and the intelligence of music.

The hologram simply does not have the intelligence of trompe
l'oeil, which is one of seduction, of always proceeding,
according to the rules of appearances, through allusion to and
ellipsis of presence. It veers, on the contrary, into
fascination, which is that of passing to the side of the double.
If, according to Mach, the universe is that of which there is no
double, no equivalent in the mirror, then with the hologram we
are already virtually in another universe: which is nothing *but*
the mirrored equivalent of this one. But which universe is this
one?

The hologram, the one of which we have always already dreamed
(but these are only poor bricolages of it) gives us the feeling,
the vertigo of passing to the other side of our own body, to the
side of the double, luminous clone, or dead twin that is never
born in our place, and watches over us by anticipation.

The hologram, perfect image and end of the imaginary. Or rather,
it is no longer an image at all—the real medium is the laser,
concentrated light, quintessentialized, which is no longer a
visible or reflexive light, but an abstract light of simulation.
Laser/scalpel. A luminous surgery whose function here is that of
the double: one operates on you to remove the double as one would
operate to remove a tumor. The double that hid in the depths of
you (of your body, of your unconscious?) and whose secret form
fed precisely your imaginary, on the condition of remaining
secret, is extracted by laser, is synthesized and materialized
before you, just as it is possible for you to pass through and
beyond it. A historical moment: the hologram is now part of this
"subliminal comfort" that is our destiny, of this happiness now
consecrated to the mental simulacrum and to the environmental
fable of special effects. (The social, the social phantasmagoria,
is now nothing but a special effect, obtained by the design of
participating networks converging in emptiness under the spectral
image of collective happiness.)

Three-dimensionality of the simulacrum—why would the simulacrum
with three dimensions be closer to the real than the one with two
dimensions? It claims to be, but paradoxically, it has the
opposite effect: to render us sensitive to the fourth dimension
as a hidden truth, a secret dimension of everything, which
suddenly takes on all the force of evidence. The closer one gets
to the perfection of the simulacrum (and this is true of objects,
but also of figures of art or of models of social or
psychological relations), the more evident it becomes (or rather
to the evil spirit of incredulity that inhabits us, more evil
still than the evil spirit of simulation) how everything escapes
representation, escapes its own double and its resemblance. In
short, there is no real: the third dimension is only the
imaginary of a two-dimensional world, the fourth that of a
three-dimensional universe … Escalation in the production of a
real that is more and more real through the addition of
successive dimensions. But, on the other hand, exaltation of the
opposite movement: only what plays with one less dimension is
true, is truly seductive.

In any case, there is no escape from this race to the real and to
realistic hallucination since, when an object is exactly like
another, *it is not exactly like it, it is a bit more exact*.
There is never similitude, any more than there is exactitude.
What is exact is already too exact, what is exact is only what
approaches the truth without trying. It is somewhat of the same
paradoxical order as the formula that says that as soon as two
billiard balls roll toward each other, the first touches the
other before the second, or, rather, one touches the other before
being touched. Which indicates that there is not even the
possibility of simultaneity in the order of time, and in the same
way no similitude possible in the order of figures. Nothing
resembles itself, and holographic reproduction, like all
fantasies of the exact synthesis or resurrection of the real
(this also goes for scientific experimentation), is already no
longer real, is already *hyperreal*. It thus never has
reproductive (truth) value, but always already simulation value.
Not an exact, but a transgressive truth, that is to say already
on the other side of the truth. What happens on the other side of
the truth, not in what would be false, but in what is more true
than the true, more real than the real? Bizarre effects
certainly, and sacrileges, much more destructive of the order of
truth than its pure negation. Singular and murderous power of the
potentialization of the truth, of the potentialization of the
real. This is perhaps why twins were deified, and sacrificed, in
a more savage culture: hypersimilitude was equivalent to the
murder of the original, and thus to a pure non-meaning. Any
classification or signification, any modality of meaning can thus
be destroyed simply by logically being elevated to the nth
power—pushed to its limit, it is as if all truth swallowed its
own criteria of truth as one "swallows one's birth certificate"
and lost all its meaning. Thus the weight of the world, or the
universe, can eventually be calculated in exact terms, but
initially it appears absurd, because it no longer has a
reference, or a mirror in which it can come to be reflected—this
totalization, which is practically equivalent to that of all the
dimensions of the real in its hyperreal double, or to that of all
the information on an individual in his genetic double (clone),
renders it immediately pataphysical. The universe itself, taken
globally, is what cannot be represented, what does not have a
possible complement in the mirror, what has no equivalence in
meaning (it is as absurd to give it a meaning, a weight of
meaning, as to give it weight at all). Meaning, truth, the real
cannot appear except locally, in a restricted horizon, they are
partial objects, partial effects of the mirror and of
equivalence. All doubling, all generalization, all passage to the
limit, all holographic extension (the fancy of exhaustively
taking account of this universe) makes them surface in their
mockery.

Viewed at this angle, even the exact sciences come dangerously
close to pataphysics. Because they depend in some way on the
hologram and on the objectivist whim of the deconstruction and
exact reconstruction of the world (in its smallest terms) founded
on a tenacious and naive faith in a pact of the similitude of
things to themselves. The real, the real object is supposed to be
equal to itself, it is supposed to resemble itself like a face in
a mirror—and this virtual similitude is in effect the only
definition of the real—and any attempt, including the holographic
one, that rests on it, will inevitably miss its object, because
it does not take its *shadow* into account (precisely the reason
why it does not resemble itself)—this hidden face where the
object crumbles, its secret. The holographic attempt literally
jumps over its shadow, and plunges into transparency, to lose
itself there.
