# Simulacra and Science Fiction #

:::{.initial-up}
Three orders of simulacra:
:::

* simulacra that are natural, naturalist, founded on the image,
on imitation and counterfeit, that are harmonious, optimistic,
and that aim for the restitution or the ideal institution of
nature made in God's image;
* simulacra that are productive, productivist, founded on energy,
  force, its materialization by the machine and in the whole
  system of production—a Promethean aim of a continuous
  globalization and expansion, of an indefinite liberation of
  energy (desire belongs to the utopias related to this order of
  simulacra);
* simulacra of simulation, founded on information, the model, the
  cybernetic game—total operationality, hyperreality, aim of
  total control.

To the first category belongs the imaginary of the *utopia*. To
the second corresponds science fiction, strictly speaking. To the
third corresponds—is there an imaginary that might correspond to
this order? The most likely answer is that the good old imaginary
of science fiction is dead and that something else is in the
process of emerging (not only in fiction but in theory as well).
The same wavering and indeterminate fate puts an end to science
fiction—but also to theory, as specific genres.

There is no real, there is no imaginary except at a certain
distance. What happens when this distance, including that between
the real and the imaginary, tends to abolish itself, to be
reabsorbed on behalf of the model? Well, from one order of
simulacra to another, the tendency is certainly toward the
reabsorption of this distance, of this gap that leaves room for
an ideal or critical projection.

* This projection is maximized in the utopian, in which a
transcendent sphere, a radically different universe takes form
(the romantic dream is still the individualized form of utopia,
in which transcendence is outlined in depth, even in unconscious
structures, but in any case the dissociation from the real world
is maximized, the island of utopia stands opposed to the
continent of the real).
* This projection is greatly reduced in science fiction: it is
  most often nothing other than an unbounded projection of the
  real world of production, but it is not qualitatively different
  from it. Mechanical or energetic extensions, speed, and power
  increase to the nth power, but the schemas and the scenarios
  are those of mechanics, metallurgy, etc. Projected hypostasis
  of the robot. (To the limited universe of the preindustrial
  era, utopia *opposed* an ideal, alternative universe. To the
  potentially infinite universe of production, science fiction
  *adds* the multiplication of its own possibilities.)
* This projection is totally reabsorbed in the implosive era of
  models. The models no longer constitute either transcendence or
  projection, they no longer constitute the imaginary in relation
  to the real, they are themselves an anticipation of the real,
  and thus leave no room for any sort of fictional
  anticipation—they are immanent, and thus leave no room for any
  kind of imaginary transcendence. The field opened is that of
  simulation in the cybernetic sense, that is, of the
  manipulation of these models at every level (scenarios, the
  setting up of simulated situations, etc.) but then *nothing
  distinguishes this operation from the operation itself and the
  gestation of the real: there is no more fiction*.

Reality could go beyond fiction: that was the surest sign of the
possibility of an ever-increasing imaginary. But the real cannot
surpass the model—it is nothing but its alibi.

The imaginary was the alibi of the real, in a world dominated by
the reality principle. Today, it is the real that has become the
alibi of the model, in a world controlled by the principle of
simulation. And, paradoxically, it is the real that has become
our true utopia—but a utopia that is no longer in the realm of
the possible, that can only be dreamt of as one would dream of a
lost object.

Perhaps science fiction from the cybernetic and hyperreal era can
only exhaust itself, in its artificial resurrection of
"historical" worlds, can only try to reconstruct in vitro, down
to the smallest details, the perimeters of a prior world, the
events, the people, the ideologies of the past, emptied of
meaning, of their original process, but hallucinatory with
retrospective truth. Thus in *Simulacra* by Philip K. Dick, the
war of Secession. Gigantic hologram in three dimensions, in which
fiction will never again be a mirror held toward the future, but
a desperate rehallucination of the past.

We can no longer imagine any other universe: the grace of
transcendence was taken away from us in that respect too.
Classical science fiction was that of an expanding universe,
besides, it forged its path in the narratives of spatial
exploration, counterparts to the more terrestrial forms of
exploration and colonization of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. There is no relationship of cause and effect there: it
is not because terrestrial space today is virtually coded,
mapped, registered, saturated, has thus in a sense closed up
again in universalizing itself—a universal market, not only of
merchandise, but of values, signs, models, leaving no room for
the imaginary—it is not exactly because of this that the
exploratory universe (technical, mental, cosmic) of science
fiction has also ceased to function. But the two are narrowly
linked, and they are two versions of the same general process of
implosion that follows the gigantic process of explosion and
expansion characteristic of past centuries. When a system reaches
its own limits and becomes saturated, a reversal is
produced—something else takes place, in the imaginary as well.

Until now we have always had a reserve of the imaginary—now the
coefficient of reality is proportional to the reserve of the
imaginary that gives it its specific weight. This is also true of
geographic and spatial exploration: when there is no longer any
virgin territory, and thus one available to the imaginary, *when
the map covers the whole territory, something like the principle
of reality disappears*. In this way, the conquest of space
constitutes an irreversible crossing toward the loss of the
terrestrial referential. There is a hemorrhaging of reality as an
internal coherence of a limited universe, once the limits of this
universe recede into infinity. The conquest of space that follows
that of the planet is equal to derealizing (dematerializing)
human space, or to transferring it into a hyperreal of
simulation. Witness this two-bedroom/kitchen/shower put into
orbit, raised to a spatial power (one could say) with the most
recent lunar module. The everydayness of the terrestrial habitat
itself elevated to the rank of cosmic value, hypostatized in
space—the satellization of the real in the transcendence of
space—it is the end of metaphysics, the end of the phantasm, the
end of science fiction—the era of hyperreality begins.

From then onward, something must change: the projection, the
extrapolation, the sort of pantographic excess that constituted
the charm of science fiction are all impossible. It is no longer
possible to fabricate the unreal from the real, the imaginary
from the givens of the real. The process will, rather, be the
opposite: it will be to put decentered situations, models of
simulation in place and to contrive to give them the feeling of
the real, of the banal, of lived experience, to reinvent the real
as fiction, precisely because it has disappeared from our life.
Hallucination of the real, of lived experience, of the quotidian,
but reconstituted, sometimes down to disquietingly strange
details, reconstituted as an animal or vegetal reserve, brought
to light with a transparent precision, but without substance,
derealized in advance, hyperrealized.

In this way, science fiction would no longer be a romantic
expansion with all the freedom and naivete that the charm of
discovery gave it, but, quite the contrary, it would evolve
implosively in the very image of our current conception of the
universe, attempting to revitalize, reactualize, requotidianize
fragments of simulation, fragments of this universal simulation
that have become for us the so-called real world.

Where would the works be that would meet, here and now, this
situational inversion, this situational reversion? Obviously the
short stories of Philip K. Dick "gravitate" in this space, if one
can use that word (but that is precisely what one can't really do
any more, because this new universe is "antigravitational," or if
it still gravitates, it is around the *hole* of the real, around
the *hole* of the imaginary). One does not see an alternative
cosmos, a cosmic folklore or exoticism, or a galactic prowess
there—one is from the start in a total simulation, without
origin, immanent, without a past, without a future, a diffusion
of all coordinates (mental, temporal, spatial, signaletic)—it is
not about a parallel universe, a double universe, or even a
possible universe—neither possible, impossible, neither real nor
unreal: *hyperreal*—it is a universe of simulation, which is
something else altogether. And not because Dick speaks
specifically of simulacra science fiction has always done so, but
it played on the double, on doubling or redoubling, either
artificial or imaginary, whereas here the double has disappeared,
there is no longer a double, one is always already in the other
world, which is no longer an other, without a mirror, a
projection, or a utopia that can reflect it—simulation is
insuperable, unsurpassable, dull and flat, without exteriority—we
will no longer even pass through to "the other side of mirror,"
that was still the golden age of transcendence.

Perhaps a still more convincing example would be that of Ballard
and of his evolution from the first very "phantasmagoric" short
stories, poetic, dreamlike, disorienting, up to *Crash*, which is
without a doubt (more than *IGH* or *Concrete Island*) the current
model of this science fiction that is no longer one. *Crash* is
*our* world, nothing in it is "invented": everything in it is
hyper-functional, both the circulation and the accident,
technique and death, sex and photographic lens, everything in it
is like a giant, synchronous, simulated machine: that is to say
the acceleration of our own models, of all models that surround
us, blended and hyperoperational in the void. This is what
distinguishes *Crash* from almost all science fiction, which
mostly still revolves around the old (mechanical and mechanistic)
couple function/ dysfunction, which it projects into the future
along the same lines of force and the same finalities that are
those of the "normal" universe. Fiction in that universe might
surpass reality (or the opposite: that is more subtle) but it
still plays by the same rules. In *Crash*, there is neither
fiction nor reality anymore—hyperreality abolishes both. It is
there that our contemporary science fiction, if there is one,
exists. *Jack Barron or Eternity*, some passages from *Everyone
to Zanzibar*.

In fact, science fiction in this sense is no longer anywhere, and
it is everywhere, in the circulation of models, here and now, in
the very principle of the surrounding simulation. It can emerge
in its crude state, from the inertia itself of the operational
world. What writer of science fiction would have "imagined" (but
precisely it can no longer be "imagined") this "reality" of East
German factories-simulacra, factories that reemploy all the
unemployed to fill all the roles and all the posts of the
traditional production process but that don't produce anything,
whose activity is consumed in a game of orders, of competition,
of writing, of bookkeeping, between one factory and another,
inside a vast network? All material production is redoubled in
the void (one of these simulacra factories even "really" failed,
putting its own unemployed out of work a second time). That is
simulation: not that the factories are fake, but precisely that
they are real, hyperreal, and that because of this they return
all "real" production, that of "serious" factories, to the same
hyperreality. What is fascinating here is not the opposition
between real factories and fake factories, but on the contrary
the lack of distinction between the two, the fact that all the
rest of production has no greater referent or deeper finality
than this "simulacra!" business. It is this hyperreal
indifference that constitutes the real "science-fictional"
quality of this episode. And one can see that it is not necessary
to invent it: it is there, emerging from a world without secrets,
without depth.

Without a doubt, the most difficult thing today, in the complex
universe of science fiction, is to unravel what still complies
(and a large part still does) with the imaginary of the second
order, of the productive/projective order, and what already comes
from this vagueness of the imaginary, of this uncertainty proper
to the third order of simulation. Thus one can clearly mark the
difference between the mechanical robot machines, characteristic
of the second order, and the cybernetic machines, computers,
etc., that, in their governing principle, depend on the third
order. But one order can certainly contaminate another, and the
computer can certainly function as a mechanical supermachine, a
superrobot, a superpower machine, exposing the productive genie
of the simulacra of the second order: the computer does not come
into play as a process of simulation, and it still bears witness
to the reflexes of a finalized universe (including ambivalence
and revolt, like the computer from *2001* or Shalmanezer in
*Everyone to Zanzibar*).

Between the *operatic* (the theatrical status of theatrical and
fantastical machinery, the "grand opera" of technique) that
corresponds to the first order, the *operative* (the industrial,
productive status, productive of power and energy) that
corresponds to the second order, and the *operational* (the
cybernetic, aleatory, uncertain status of "metatechnique") that
corresponds to the third order, all interference can still be
produced today at the level of science fiction. But only the last
order can still truly interest us.
