# The Animals: Territory and Metamorphoses #

:::{.initial}
What did the torturers of the Inquisition want? The admission of
evil, of the principle of evil. It was necessary to make the
accused say that he was not guilty except by accident, through
the incidence of the principle of Evil in the divine order. Thus
confession restored a reassuring causality, and torture, and the
extermination of evil through torture, were nothing but the
triumphal coronation (neither sadistic nor expiatory) of the fact
of having *produced Evil as cause*. Otherwise, the least heresy
would have rendered all of divine creation suspect. In the same
way, when we use and abuse animals in laboratories, in rockets,
with experimental ferocity in the name of science, what
confession are we seeking to extort from them from beneath the
scalpel and the electrodes?
:::

Precisely the admission of a principle of objectivity of which
science is never certain, of which it secretly despairs. Animals
must be made to say that they are not animals, that bestiality,
savagery—with what these terms imply of unintelligibility,
radical strangeness to reason—do not exist, but on the contrary
the most bestial behaviors, the most singular, the most abnormal
are resolved in science, in physiological mechanisms, in cerebral
connections, etc. Bestiality, and its principle of uncertainty,
must be killed in animals.

Experimentation is thus not a means to an end, it is a
*contemporary* challenge and torture. It does not found an
intelligibility, it extorts a confession from science as
previously one extorted a profession of faith. A confession whose
apparent distances—illness, madness, bestiality—are nothing but a
provisional crack in the transparency of causality. This proof,
as before that of divine reason, must be continually redone and
everywhere redone—in this sense we are all animals, and
laboratory animals, whom one continually tests in order to extort
their reflex behaviors, which are like so many confessions of
rationality in the final moment. Everywhere bestiality must yield
to reflex animality, exorcising an order of the indecipherable,
of the savage, of which, precisely in their silence, animals have
remained the incarnation for us.

Animals have thus preceded us on the path of liberal
extermination. All the aspects of the modern treatment of animals
retrace the vicissitudes of the manipulation of humans, from
experimentation to industrial pressure in breeding.

>:::{.noindent}
>Gathered at a convention in Lyons, European veterinarians became
>concerned about the diseases and psychological troubles that
>develop in industrial breeding farms.
>:::
>:::{.signature}
>—*Science and the Future*, July 1973
>:::

Rabbits develop a morbid anxiety, they become coprophagous and
sterile. The rabbit is "anxious," "maladapted" from birth, so it
seems. Greater sensitivity to infections, to parasites. The
antibodies lose their efficacy, the females become sterile.
Spontaneously, if one can say so, mortality increases.

The hysteria of chickens infects the whole group, a "psychic"
collective tension that can reach a critical threshold: all the
animals begin to fly and scream in all directions. The crisis
over, there is a collapse, general terror, the animals take
refuge in the corner, mute and as if paralyzed. At the first
shock, the crisis begins again. It can last several weeks. One
attempted to give them tranquilizers …

Cannibalism on the part of pigs. The animals wound themselves.
The calves begin to lick everything that surrounds them,
sometimes even unto death.

"It is certainly necessary to establish that bred animals suffer
*psychically*… A zoo psychiatry becomes necessary… A psychic life
of frustration represents an obstacle to normal development."

Darkness, red light, gadgets, tranquilizers, nothing works. In
birds there is a hierarchy of access to food—the *pecking order*.
In these conditions of overpopulation, the last in the order is
never able to get to the food. One thus wished to break the
*pecking order* and *democratize* access to food through another
system of distribution. Failure: the destruction of this symbolic
order brings along with it total confusion for the birds, and a
chronic instability. Good example of absurdity: one knows the
analogous ravages of good democratic intentions in tribal
societies.

Animals somatize! Extraordinary discovery! Cancers, gastric
ulcers, myocardial infarction in mice, pigs, chickens!

In conclusion, the author says, it certainly seems that the only
remedy is space—"a bit more space, and a lot of the problems
observed would disappear." In any case, "the fate of these
animals would become less miserable." He is thus satisfied with
this conference: "The current concern about the fate of bred
animals is witness, *once again*, to the alliance of the morality
and the meaning of a well—understood interest." "One cannot
simply do whatever one wants with nature." The problems having
become serious enough to damage the profitability of business,
this drop in profitability may lead the breeders to return the
animals to more normal living conditions. "In order to be raised
in a healthy manner, it is now necessary to be always concerned
with the *mental equilibrium of the animals*." And he foresees
the time when one will send animals, like people, to the country,
to restore their mental equilibrium.

One has never said better how much "humanism," "normality,"
"quality of life" were nothing but the vicissitudes of
profitability. The parallel between these animals sick from
surplus value and humans sick from industrial concentration, from
the scientific organization of work and assembly—line factories
is illuminating. In the latter case as well, the capitalist
"breeders" were led to a revision that was destructive of the
mode of exploitation, innovating and reinventing the "quality of
work," the "enrichment of tasks," discovering the "human"
sciences and the "psycho-sociological" dimension of the factory.
Only the inevitability of death renders the example of the
animals more shocking still than that of men on an assembly line.

Against the industrial organization of death, animals have no
other recourse, no other possible defiance, except suicide. All
the anomalies described are suicidal. These resistances are a
failure of industrial reason (drop in profits), but also one
senses that they run counter to the *logical* reasoning of the
specialists. In the logic of reflex behaviors and of the
animal—machine, in rational logic, these anomalies are not
qualifiable. One will therefore bestow on animals a psychic life,
an irrational and derailed psychic life, given over to liberal
and humanist therapy, without the final objective ever having
changed: death.

With ingenuity, one thus discovers, like a new and unexplored
*scientific* field, the psychic life of the animal as soon as he
is revealed to be maladapted to the death one is preparing for
him. In the same way one rediscovers psychology, sociology, the
sexuality of prisoners as soon as it becomes impossible to purely
and simply incarcerate them.^[1. Thus, in Texas, four hundred men
and one hundred women experiment with the sweetest penitentiary
in the world. A child was born there last June and there were
only three escapes in two years. The men and women take their
meals together and get together outside of group therapy
sessions. Each prisoner possesses the only key to his individual
room. Couples are able to be alone in the empty rooms. To this
day, thirty-five prisoners have escaped, but for the most part
they have returned of their own accord.] One discovers that the
prisoner needs liberty, sexuality, "normalcy" to withstand
prison, just as industrially bred animals need a certain "quality
of life" to die within the norm. And nothing about this is
contradictory. The worker also needs responsibility,
selfmanagement in order to better respond to the imperative of
production. Everyone needs a psychic life to adapt. There is no
other reason for the arrival of the psychic life, conscious or
unconscious. And its golden age, which still continues, will have
coincided with the impossibility of a rational socialization in
every domain. Never would the humanities or psychoanalysis have
existed if it had been miraculously possible to reduce man to his
"rational" behaviors. The whole discovery of the psychological,
whose complexity can extend ad infinitum, comes from nothing but
the impossibility of exploiting to death (the workers), of
incarcerating to death (the detained), of fattening to death (the
animals), according to the strict law of equivalences:

* so much caloric energy and time = so much work power
* such an infraction = such an equivalent punishment
* so much food = optimal weight and industrial death.

Everything is blocked, so psychic life, the mental, neurosis, the
psychosocial, etc. are born, not at all in order to break this
delirious equation, but to restore the principle of mutually
agreed upon equivalences.

Beasts of burden, they had to work for man. Beasts of demand,
they are summoned to respond to the interrogation of science.^[In
French, *bêtes de somme* means beasts of burden. Baudrillard
plays with the word somme in the phrase that follows: "Bêtes de
sommation, elles sont sommées de répondre a l'interrogatoire de
la science," and in the use of the word *consommation* in the
following phrase.—[Trans]{.smallcaps}.] Beasts of consumption,
they have become the meat of industry. Beasts of somatization,
they are now made to speak the "psy" language, to answer for
their psychic life and the misdeeds of their unconscious.
Everything has happened to them that has happened to us. Our
destiny has never been separated from theirs, and this is a sort
of bitter revenge on Human Reason, which has become used to
upholding the absolute privilege of the Human over the Bestial.

Besides, animals were only demoted to the status of inhumanity as
reason and humanism progressed. A logic parallel to that of
racism. An objective animal "reign" has only existed since Man
has existed. It would take too long to redo the genealogy of
their respective statuses, but the abyss that separates them
today, the one that permits us to send beasts, in our place, to
respond to the terrifying universes of space and laboratories,
the one that permits the liquidation of species even as they are
archived as specimens in the African reserves or in the hell of
zoos—since there is no more room for them in our culture than
there is for the dead—the whole covered by a racist
sentimentality (baby seals, Brigitte Bardot), this abyss that
separates them follows domestication, just as true racism follows
slavery.

Once animals had a more sacred, more divine character than men.
There is not even a reign of the "human" in primitive societies,
and for a long time the animal order has been the order of
reference. Only the animal is worth being sacrificed, as a god,
the sacrifice of man only comes afterward, according to a
degraded order. Men qualify only by their affiliation to the
animal: the Bororos "are" macaws. This is not of the prelogical
or psychoanalytic order—nor of the mental order of
classification, to which Lévi-Strauss reduced the animal effigy
(even if it is still fabulous that animals served as a
*language*, this was also part of their divinity)-no, this
signifies that Bororos and macaws are part of a cycle, and that
the figure of the cycle excludes any division of species, any of
the distinctive oppositions upon which we live. The structural
opposition is *diabolic*, it divides and confronts distinct
identities: such is the division of the Human, which throws
beasts into the Inhuman—the cycle, itself, is symbolic: it
abolishes the positions in a reversible enchainment—in this
sense, the Bororos "are" macaws, in the same way that the Canaque
say the dead walk among the living. (Does Deleuze envision
something like that in his becoming-animal and when he says "Be
the rose panther!"?)

Whatever it may be, animals have always had, until our era, a
divine or sacrificial nobility that all mythologies recount. Even
murder by hunting is still a symbolic relation, as opposed to an
experimental dissection. Even domestication is still a symbolic
relation, as opposed to industrial breeding. One only has to look
at the status of animals in peasant society. And the status of
domestication, which presupposes land, a clan, a system of
parentage of which the animals are a part, must not be confused
with the status of the domestic pet—the only type of animals that
are left to us outside reserves and breeding stations—dogs, cats,
birds, hamsters, all packed together in the affection of their
master. The trajectory animals have followed, from divine
sacrifice to dog cemeteries with atmospheric music, from sacred
defiance to ecological sentimentality, speaks loudly enough of
the vulgarization of the status of man himself—it once again
describes an unexpected reciprocity between the two.

In particular, our sentimentality toward animals is a sure sign
of the disdain in which we hold them. It is proportional to this
disdain. It is in proportion to being relegated to
irresponsibility, to the inhuman, that the animal becomes worthy
of the human ritual of affection and protection, just as the
child does in direct proportion to being relegated to a status of
innocence and childishness. Sentimentality is nothing but the
infinitely degraded form of bestiality, the racist commiseration,
in which we ridiculously cloak animals to the point of rendering
them sentimental themselves. Those who used to sacrifice animals
did not take them for beasts. And even the Middle Ages, which
condemned and punished them in due form, was in this way much
closer to them than we are, we who are filled with horror at this
practice. They held them to be guilty: which was a way of
honoring them. We take them for nothing, and it is on this basis
that we are "human" with them. We no longer sacrifice them, we no
longer punish them, and we are proud of it, but it is simply that
we have domesticated them, worse: that we have made of them a
racially inferior world, no longer even worthy of our justice,
but only of our affection and social charity, no longer worthy of
punishment and of death, but only of experimentation and
extermination like meat from the butchery.

It is the reabsorption of all violence in regard to them that
today forms the monstrosity of beasts. The violence of sacrifice,
which is one of "intimacy" (Bataille), has been succeeded by the
sentimental or experimental violence that is one of distance.

Monstrosity has changed in meaning. The original monstrosity of
the beast, object of terror and fascination, but never negative,
always ambivalent, object of exchange also and of metaphor, in
sacrifice, in mythology, in the heraldic bestiary, and even in
our dreams and our phantasms—this monstrosity, rich in every
threat and every metamorphosis, one that is secretly resolved in
the living culture of men, and that is a form of alliance, has
been exchanged for a spectacular monstrosity: that of King Kong
wrenched from his jungle and transformed into a music-hall star.
Formerly, the cultural hero annihilated the beast, the dragon,
the monster—and from the spilt blood plants, men, culture were
born; today, it is the beast King Kong who comes to sack our
industrial metropolises, who comes to liberate us from our
culture, a culture dead from having purged itself of all real
monstrosity and from having broken its pact with it (which was
expressed in the film by the primitive gift of the woman). The
profound seduction of the film comes from this inversion of
meaning: all inhumanity has gone over to the side of men, all
humanity has gone over to the side of captive bestiality, and to
the respective seduction of man and of beast, monstrous seduction
of one order by the other, the human and the bestial. Kong dies
for having renewed, through seduction, this possibility of the
metamorphosis of one reign into another, this incestuous
promiscuity between beasts and men (though one that is never
realized, except in a symbolic and ritual mode).

In the end, the progression that the beast followed is not
different form that of madness and childhood, of sex or
negritude. A logic of exclusion, of reclusion, of discrimination
and necessarily, in return, a logic of reversion, reversible
violence that makes it so that all of society finally aligns
itself on the axioms of madness, of childhood, of sexuality, and
of inferior races (purged, it must be said, of the radical
interrogation to which, from the very heart of their exclusion,
they lent importance). The convergence of processes of
civilization is astounding. Animals, like the dead, and so many
others, have followed this uninterrupted process of annexation
through extermination, which consists of liquidation, then of
making the extinct species speak, of making them present the
confession of their disappearance. Making animals speak, as one
has made the insane, children, sex (Foucault) speak. This is even
deluded in regard to animals, whose principle of uncertainty,
which they have caused to weigh on men since the rupture in their
alliance with men, resides in the fact that *they do not speak*.

*The challenge of madness has historically been met by the
hypothesis of the unconscious.* The Unconscious is this
logistical mechanism that permits us to think madness (and more
generally all strange and anomalous formations) in a system of
meaning opened to nonmeaning, which will make room for the
terrors of the nonsensical, now intelligible under the auspices
of a certain discourse: psychic life, drive, repression, etc. The
mad were the ones who forced us to the hypothesis of the
unconscious, but we are the ones in return who have trapped them
there. Because if, initially, the Unconscious seems to turn
against Reason and to bring to it a radical subversion, if it
still seems charged with the potential of the rupture of madness,
later it turns against madness, because it is what enables
madness to be annexed to a reason more universal than classical
reason.

The mad, once mute, today are heard by everyone; one has found
the grid on which to collect their once absurd and indecipherable
messages. Children speak, to the adult universe they are no
longer those simultaneously strange and insignificant beings
children signify, they have become significant—not through some
sort of "liberation" of their speech, but because adult reason
has given itself the most subtle means to avert the threat of
their silence. The primitives also are heard, one seeks them out,
one listens to them, they are no longer beasts. Lévi-Strauss
pointed out that their mental structures were the same as ours,
psychoanalysis rallied them to Oedipus, and to the libido—all of
our codes functioned well, and they responded to them. One had
buried them under silence, one buries them beneath speech,
"different" speech certainly, but beneath the word of the day,
"difference," as formerly one did beneath the unity of Reason;
let us not be misled by this, it is the same order that is
advancing. The imperialism of reason, neoimperialism of
difference.

What is essential is that nothing escape the empire of meaning,
the sharing of meaning. Certainly, behind all that, nothing
speaks to us, neither the mad, nor the dead, nor children, nor
savages, and fundamentally we know nothing of them, but what is
essential is that Reason save face, and that everything escape
silence.

They, the animals, do not speak. In a universe of increasing
speech, of the constraint to confess and to speak, only they
remain mute, and for this reason they seem to retreat far from
us, behind the horizon of truth. But it is what makes us intimate
with them. It is not the ecological problem of their survival
that is important, but still and always that of their silence. In
a world bent on doing nothing but making one speak, in a world
assembled under the hegemony of signs and discourse, their
silence weighs more and more heavily on our organization of
meaning.

Certainly, one makes them speak, and with all means, some more
innocent than others. They spoke the moral discourse of man in
fables. They supported structural discourse in the theory of
totemism. Every day they deliver their "objective"—anatomical,
physiological, genetic—message in laboratories. They served in
turns as metaphors for virtue and vice, as an energetic and
ecological model, as a mechanical and formal model in bionics, as
a phantasmatic register for the unconscious and, lastly, as a
model for the absolute deterritorialization of desire in
Deleuze's "becoming-animal" (paradoxical: to take the animal as a
model of deterritorialization when he is the territorial being
par excellence).

In all this—metaphor, guinea pig, model, allegory (without
forgetting their alimentary "use value")—animals maintain a
compulsory discourse. Nowhere do they really speak, because they
only furnish the responses one asks for. It is their way of
sending the Human back to his circular codes, behind which their
silence analyzes us.

One never escapes the reversion that follows any kind of
exclusion. Refusing reason to madmen leads sooner or later to
dismantling the bases of this reason—the mad take revenge in some
way. Refusing animals the unconscious, repression, the symbolic
(confused with language) is, one can hope, sooner or later (in a
sort of disconnection subsequent to that of madness and of the
unconscious) to put in question once again the validity of these
concepts, just as they govern and distinguish us today. Because,
if formerly the privilege of Man was founded on the monopoly of
consciousness, today it is founded on the monopoly of the
unconscious.

Animals have no unconscious, this is well known. Without a doubt,
they dream, but this is a conjecture of a bioelectrical order,
and they lack language, which alone gives meaning to the dream by
inscribing it in the symbolic order. We can fantasize about them,
project our fantasies on them and think we are sharing this
mise-en-scène. But this is comfortable for us—in fact animals are
not intelligible to us either under the regime of consciousness
or under that of the unconscious. Therefore, it is not a question
of forcing them to it, but just the opposite of seeing *in what
way they put in question this very hypothesis of the unconscious,
and to what other hypothesis they force us*. Such is the meaning,
or the non-meaning of their silence.

Such was the silence of madmen that it forced us to the
hypothesis of the unconscious such is the resistance of animals
that it forces us to change hypotheses. For if to us they are and
will remain unintelligible, yet we live in some kind of
understanding with them. And if we live in this way, under the
sign of a general ecology where in a sort of planetary niche,
which is only the enlarged dimension of the Platonic cave, the
ghosts of animals and the natural elements would come to rub
against the shadow of men who survived the political economy—no,
our profound understanding with beasts, even on the road to
disappearance, is placed under the conjugated sign, opposite in
appearance, of *metamorphosis and of territory*.

Nothing seems more fixed in the perpetuation of the species than
animals, but yet they are for us the image of metamorphosis, of
all possible metamorphoses. Nothing more errant, more nomadic in
appearance than animals, and yet their law is that of the
territory. ^[That animals wander is a myth, and the current
representation of the unconscious and of desire as erratic and
nomadic belongs to the same "order. Animals have never wandered,
were never deterritorialized. A whole liberatory phantasmagoria
is drawn in opposition to the constraints of modern society, a
representation of nature and of beasts as savagery, as the
freedom to "fulfill all needs," today "of realizing all his
desires" because modern Rousseauism has taken the form of the
indeterminacy of drive, of the wandering of desire and of the
nomadism of infinitude—but it is the same mystique of unleashed,
noncoded forces with no finality other than their own eruption.

Now, free, virgin nature, without limits or territories, where
each wanders at will, never existed, except in the imaginary of
the dominant order, of which this nature is the equivalent
mirror. We project (nature, desire, animality, rhizome … ) the
very schema of deterritorialization that is that of the economic
system and of capital as ideal savagery. Liberty is nowhere but
in capital, it is what produced it, it is what deepens it. There
is thus an exact correlation between the social legislation of
value (urban, industrial, repressive, etc.) and the imaginary
savagery one places in opposition to it: they are both
"deterritorialized" and in each other's image. Moreover, the
radicality of "desire," one sees this in current theories,
increases at the same rate as civilized abstraction, not at all
antagonistically, but absolutely according to the same movement,
that of the same form always more decoded, more decentered,
"freer," which simultaneously envelops our real and our
imaginary. Nature, liberty, desire, etc., do not even express a
dream the opposite of capital, they directly translate the
progress or the ravages of this culture, they even anticipate it,
because they dream of total deterritorialization where the system
never imposes anything but what is relative: the demand of
"liberty" is never anything but going further than the system,
but in the same direction.

Neither the beasts nor the savages know "nature" in our way: they
only know *territories*, limited, marked, which are spaces of
insurmountable reciprocity.] But one must push aside all the
countermeanings on this notion of territory. It is not at all the
enlarged relation of a subject or of a group to its own space, a
sort of organic right to private property of the individual, of
the clan or of the species—such is the phantasm of psychology and
of sociology extended to all of ecology—nor this sort of vital
function, of an environmental bubble where the whole system of
needs is summed up.^[Thus, Henri Laborit refuses the
interpretation of territory in terms of instinct or private
property: "One has never brought forth as evidence, either in the
hypothalamus or elsewhere, either a cellular group or neural
pathways that are differentiated in relation to the notion of
territory… No territorial center seems to exist… It is not useful
to appeal to a particular instinct"—but it is useful to do so in
order to better return it to a functionality of needs extended to
include cultural behaviors, which today is the vulgate common to
economics, psychology, sociology, etc.: "The territory thus
becomes the space necessary to the realization of the act of
bestowing, the vital space… The bubble, the territory thus
represent the morsel of space in immediate contact with the
organism, the one in which it 'opens' its thermodynamic exchanges
in order to maintain its own structure… With the growing
interdependence of human individuals, with the promiscuity that
characterizes the great modern cities, the individual bubble has
shrunk considerably…" Spatial, functional, homeostatic
conception. As if the stake of a group or of a man, even of an
animal, were the equilibrium of his bubble and the homeostasis of
his exchanges, internal and external!] A territory is also not a
space, with what this term implies for us about liberty and
appropriation. Neither instinct, nor need, nor structure (be it
"cultural" and "behavioral"), the notion of territory is also
opposed in some way to that of the unconscious. The unconscious
is a "buried," repressed, and indefinitely subdivided structure.
The territory is open and circumscribed. The unconscious is the
site of the indefinite repetition of subjective repression and
fantasies. The territory is the site of a completed cycle of
parentage and exchanges—without a subject, but without exception:
animal and vegetal cycle, cycle of goods and wealth, cycle of
parentage and the species, cycle of women and ritual—there is no
subject and everything is exchanged. The obligations are absolute
therein—total reversibility—but no one knows death there, since
all is metamorphosed. Neither subject, nor death, nor
unconscious, nor repression, since nothing stops the enchainment
of forms.

Animals have no unconscious, because they have a territory. Men
have only had an unconscious since they lost a territory. At once
territories and metamorphoses have been taken from them—the
unconscious is the individual structure of mourning in which this
loss is incessantly, hopelessly replayed—animals are the
nostalgia for it. The question that they raise for us would thus
be this one: don't we live now and already, beyond the effects of
the linearity and the accumulation of reason, beyond the effects
of the conscious and unconscious, according to this brute,
symbolic mode, of indefinite cycling and reversion over a finite
space? And beyond the ideal schema that is that of our culture,
of all culture maybe, of the accumulation of energy, and of the
final liberation, don't we dream of implosion rather than of
explosion, of metamorphosis rather than energy, of obligation and
ritual defiance rather than of liberty, of the territorial cycle
rather than of … But the animals do not ask questions. They are
silent.
