# On Nihilism #

:::{.initial}
Nihilism no longer wears the dark, Wagnerian, Spenglerian,
fuliginous colors of the end of the century. It no longer comes
from a weltanschauung of decadence nor from a metaphysical
radicality born of the death of God and of all the consequences
that must be taken from this death. Today's nihilism is one of
transparency, and it is in some sense more radical, more crucial
than in its prior and historical forms, because this
transparency, this irresolution is indissolubly that of the
system, and that of all the theory that still pretends to analyze
it. When God died, there was still Nietzsche to say so—the great
nihilist before the Eternal and the cadaver of the Eternal. But
before the simulated transparency of all things, before the
simulacrum of the materialist or idealist realization of the
world in hyperreality (God is not dead, he has become
hyper-real), there is no longer a theoretical or critical God to
recognize his own.
:::

The universe, and all of us, have entered live into simulation,
into the malefic, not even malefic, indifferent, sphere of
deterrence: in a bizarre fashion, nihilism has been entirely
realized no longer through destruction, but through simulation
and deterrence. From the active, violent phantasm, from the
phantasm of the myth and the stage that it also was,
historically, it has passed into the transparent, falsely
transparent, operation of things. What then remains of a possible
nihilism in theory? What new scene can unfold, where nothing and
death could be replayed as a *challenge*, as a stake?

We are in a new, and without a doubt insoluble, position in
relation to prior forms of nihilism:

Romanticism is its first great manifestation: it, along with the
Enlightenment's Revolution, corresponds to the destruction of the
order of appearances.

Surrealism, dada, the absurd, and political nihilism are the
second great manifestation, which corresponds to the destruction
of the order of meaning.

The first is still an aesthetic form of nihilism (dandyism), the
second, a political, historical, and metaphysical form
(terrorism).

These two forms no longer concern us except in part, or not at
all. The nihilism of transparency is no longer either aesthetic
or political, no longer borrows from either the extermination of
appearances, nor from extinguishing the embers of meaning, nor
from the last nuances of an apocalypse. There is no longer an
apocalypse (only aleatory terrorism still tries to reflect it,
but it is certainly no longer political, and it only has one mode
of manifestation left that is at the same time a mode of
disappearance: the media now the media are not a stage where
something is played, they are a strip, a track, a perforated map
of which we are no longer even spectators: receivers). The
apocalypse is finished, today it is the precession of the
neutral, of forms of the neutral and of indifference. I will
leave it to be considered whether there can be a romanticism, an
aesthetic of the neutral therein. I don't think so—all that
remains, is the fascination for desertlike and indifferent forms,
for the very operation of the system that annihilates us. Now,
fascination (in contrast to seduction, which was attached to
appearances, and to dialectical reason, which was attached to
meaning) is a nihilistic passion par excellence, it is the
passion proper to the mode of disappearance. We are fascinated by
all forms of disappearance, of our disappearance. Melancholic and
fascinated, such is our general situation in an era of
involuntary transparency.

:::{.noindent .break}
I am a nihilist.
:::

I observe, I accept, I assume the immense process of the
destruction of appearances (and of the seduction of appearances)
in the service of meaning (representation, history, criticism,
etc.) that is the fundamental fact of the nineteenth century. The
true revolution of the nineteenth century, of modernity, is the
radical destruction of appearances, the disenchantment of the
world and its abandonment to the violence of interpretation and
of history.

I observe, I accept, I assume, I analyze the second revolution,
that of the twentieth century, that of postmodernity, which is
the immense process of the destruction of meaning, equal to the
earlier destruction of appearances. He who strikes with meaning
is killed by meaning.

The dialectic stage, the critical stage is empty. There is no
more stage. There is no therapy of meaning or therapy through
meaning: therapy itself is part of the generalized process of
indifferentiation.

The stage of analysis itself has become uncertain, aleatory:
theories float (in fact, nihilism is impossible, because it is
still a desperate but determined theory, an imaginary of the end,
a weltanschauung of catastrophe).^[There are cultures that have
no *imaginary* except of their origin and have no imaginary of
their end. There are those that are obsessed by both… Two other
types of figures are possible… Having no imaginary except of the
end (our culture, nihilistic). No longer having any imaginary,
neither of the origin nor of the end (that which is coming,
aleatory).]

Analysis is itself perhaps the decisive element of the immense
process of the freezing over of meaning. The surplus of meaning
that theories bring, their competition at the level of meaning is
completely secondary in relation to their coalition in the
glacial and four-tiered operation of dissection and transparency.
One must be conscious that, no matter how the analysis proceeds,
it proceeds toward the freezing over of meaning, it assists in
the precession of simulacra and of indifferent forms. The desert
grows.

Implosion of meaning in the media. Implosion of the social in the
masses. Infinite growth of the masses as a function of the
acceleration of the system. Energetic impasse. Point of inertia.

A destiny of inertia for a saturated world. The phenomena of
inertia are accelerating (if one can say that). The arrested
forms proliferate, and growth is immobilized in excrescence. Such
is also the secret of the hypertelie, of what goes further than
its own end. It would be our own mode of destroying finalities:
going further, too far in the same direction—destruction of
meaning through simulation, hypersimulation, hypertelie. Denying
its own end through hyperfinality (the crustacean, the statues of
Easter Island) is this not also the obscene secret of cancer?
Revenge of excrescence on growth, revenge of speed on inertia.

The masses themselves are caught up in a gigantic process of
inertia through acceleration. They are this excrescent,
devouring, process that annihilates all growth and all surplus
meaning. They are this circuit short-circuited by a monstrous
finality.

It is this point of inertia and what happens outside this point
of inertia that today is fascinating, enthralling (gone,
therefore, the discreet charm of the dialectic). If it is
nihilistic to privilege this point of inertia and the analysis of
this irreversibility of systems up to the point of no return,
then I am a nihilist.

If it is nihilistic to be obsessed by the mode of disappearance,
and no longer by the mode of production, then I am a nihilist.
Disappearance, aphanisis, implosion, Fury of *Verschwindens*.
Transpolitics is the elective sphere of the mode of disappearance
(of the real, of meaning, of the stage, of history, of the
social, of the individual). To tell the truth, it is no longer so
much a question of nihilism: in disappearance, in the desertlike,
aleatory, and indifferent form, there is no longer even pathos,
the pathetic of nihilism that mythical energy that is still the
force of nihilism, of radicality, mythic denial, dramatic
anticipation. It is no longer even disenchantment, with the
seductive and nostalgic, itself enchanted, tonality of
disenchantment. It is simply disappearance.

The trace of this radicality of the mode of disappearance is
already found in Adorno and Benjamin, parallel to a nostalgic
exercise of the dialectic. Because there is a nostalgia of the
dialectic, and without a doubt the most subtle dialectic is
nostalgic to begin with. But more deeply, there is in Benjamin
and Adorno another tonality, that of a melancholy attached to the
system itself, one that is incurable and beyond any dialectic. It
is this melancholia of systems that today takes the upper hand
through the ironically transparent forms that surround us. It is
this melancholia that is becoming our fundamental passion.

It is no longer the spleen or the vague yearnings of the
fin-de-siècle soul. It is no longer nihilism either, which in
some sense aims at normalizing everything through destruction,
the passion of resentment (*ressentiment*).^[Cf. Nietzsche's use
of the word "ressentiment" throughout *Thus Spoke
Zaralhustra*.—[Trans]{.smallcaps}.] No, melancholia is the
fundamental tonality of functional systems, of current systems of
simulation, of programming and information. Melancholia is the
inherent quality of the mode of the disappearance of meaning, of
the mode of the volatilization of meaning in operational systems.
And we are all melancholic.

Melancholia is the brutal disaffection that characterizes our
saturated systems. Once the hope of balancing good and evil, true
and false, indeed of confronting some values of the same order,
once the more general hope of a relation of forces and a stake
has vanished. Everywhere, always, the system is too strong:
hegemonic.

Against this hegemony of the system, one can exalt the ruses of
desire, practice revolutionary micrology of the quotidian, exalt
the molecular drift or even defend cooking. This does not resolve
the imperious necessity of checking the system in broad daylight.

This, only terrorism can do.

It is the trait of reversion that effaces the remainder, just as
a single ironic smile effaces a whole discourse, just as a single
flash of denial in a slave effaces all the power and pleasure of
the master.

The more hegemonic the system, the more the imagination is struck
by the smallest of its reversals. The challenge, even
infinitesimal, is the image of a chain failure. Only this
reversibility without a counterpart is an event today, on the
nihilistic and disaffected stage of the political. Only it
mobilizes the imaginary.

If being a nihilist, is carrying, to the unbearable limit of
hegemonic systems, this radical trait of derision and of
violence, this challenge that the system is summoned to answer
through its own death, then I am a terrorist and nihilist in
theory as the others are with their weapons. Theoretical
violence, not truth, is the only resource left us.

But such a sentiment is utopian. Because it would be beautiful to
be a nihilist, if there were still a radicality—as it would be
nice to be a terrorist, if death, including that of the
terrorist, still had meaning.

But it is at this point that things become insoluble. Because to
this active nihilism of radicality, the system opposes its own,
the nihilism of neutralization. The system is itself also
nihilistic, in the sense that it has the power to pour
everything, including what denies it, into indifference.

In this system, death itself shines by virtue of its absence.
(The Bologna train station, the Oktoberfest in Munich: the dead
are annulled by indifference, that is where terrorism is the
involuntary accomplice of the whole system, not politically, but
in the accelerated form of indifference that it contributes to
imposing.)

Death no longer has a stage, neither phantasmatic nor political,
on which to represent itself, to play itself out, either a
ceremonial or a violent one. And this is the victory of the other
nihilism, of the other terrorism, that of the system.

There is no longer a stage, not even the minimal illusion that
makes events capable of adopting the force of reality-no more
stage either of mental or political solidarity: what do Chile,
Biafra, the boat people, Bologna, or Poland matter? All of that
comes to be annihilated on the television screen. We are in the
era of events without consequences (and of theories without
consequences).

There is no more hope for meaning. And without a doubt this is a
good thing: meaning is mortal. But that on which it has imposed
its ephemeral reign, what it hoped to liquidate in order to
impose the reign of the Enlightenment, that is, appearances,
they, are immortal, invulnerable to the nihilism of meaning or of
non-meaning itself.

This is where seduction begins.
